---
title: "2018 Greiner Civil Procedure 2 Final Exam Model Answer"
source: "exams/original/2018-greiner-civpro2-model-answer.docx"
extracted_date: 2026-04-17
---

Question 1

The emergency order is probably unconstitutional.   To begin, Bathilda’s efforts to provide notice of the proceeding, and thus of the emergency filing, fail under Flowers: the email delivery failure notification should have prompted Bathilda to investigate further reasonable steps, such as a quick internet search for Florean’s fax or telephone number.  Kreacher showed both of which were easily available.

Moreover, section 31(a)(3) does not require any sworn testimony, referring only to “affidavits or sworn statements, if any.”  True, section 31(a)(2) requires that the claimant file any relevant documents in her possession, and an ALJ (not a clerk) makes the decision.  But in many FLDRA cases (including this case), the key issue (as here, the corn’s condition) will turn on testimony, not documents (Doehr).  There is no requirement that the defendant be allowed to submit evidence and argument when time allows (Florean had no opportunity here).  There is no claimant bond requirement, and no counterbond procedure allowing the defendant to regain possession (Doehr, concurring opinion).  The claimant need not (and did not here) have any underlying property right.  Section 31 does not articulate what would count for urgency justifying seizure (such as spoliation of goods).  Nothing says that a seizure order be followed by a speedy adjudication (although the procedure here was expeditious).

Florean can prevent the FLDRA division from litigating the case (including the emergency order) by demanding a jury trial.  Bathilda’s states an ordinary common law breach claim for damages, for which there has always been a jury trial right (no need for a Chauffeurs analysis).  The FLDRA division cannot sit a jury.  No public rights exception applies because no government entity acting as a sovereign/regulator is involved.

Regarding the overall FLDRA procedure, there is probably constitutional SMJ due to minimal diversity (easily present) and derivation of corn from federal land (sufficient under the expansive reading of Art 3 in Osborne), and the statute’s jurisdictional grant invokes the Article 3 constitutional power.  Under 29(b), there is specific IPJ due to the CA longarm (limits of constitution) plus the minimal contacts (corn sale in CA) plus fairness/reasonableness factors, such as the testimonial evidence from individuals in California, the contracting with a CA-based party, and CA’s interest in disposition of property within CA.

Whether Tonks could use ONMCE to preclude Florean, e.g., from denying that the Hogsmeade bridge closure is not a sufficient excuse for the breach probably depends on whether the FLDRA division procedures comply with the R2 of Judgments Section 83(2), meaning PDP norms.  If so, then under federal common law, which matches the state law of Oregon (and California, if needed, Semtek), ONMCE would probably be allowed because Section 29(g) prevented Tonks from joining the Bathilda-Florean FLDRA proceeding.  The other elements of issue preclusion are met:  same issue per immediately above (see specific FLDRA finding of no excuse); Florean would litigate both hard to avoid liability; and were liability imposed, decision on the bridge closure defense would necessary to an award for Bathilda.  So we turn to a procedural due process analysis, which we would need anyway to assess the constitutionality of a California FLDRA division judgment in the Bathilda-Florean proceeding.

The California FLDRA’s procedures probably are sufficient under Section 83(2) and PDP minimums.  Aside from Flowers issue discussed above, the notice procedure calls for reasonable efforts, the Mullane standard, satisfying 83(2)(a).  Under section 29(f) as illustrated by Judge Grubbly-Plank’s order, there is a right to present evidence and rebut the opposing parties’ evidence with legal argument and evidence, satisfying 83(2)(b).  There is no indication that FLDRA divisions will create new law, and Judge Grubbly-Plank’s order specifies a moment of final judgment, satisfying 83(2)(c-d).  The FLDRA does not allow discovery, a live hearing, an appeal, or legal assistance at state expense, but the Restatement requires none of these things, nor does the DPC in a purely commercial dispute (contrast Vitek (liberty) and Goldberg (subsistence)).

It is unlikely that Florean could use claim preclusion to obtain summary judgment in a suit by Tonks in Oregon state court.  The FLDRA division judgment would be final and on the merits, and Tonks is likely in privity with Bathilda because although it did not control the Bathilda litigation, it did step into Bathilda’s shoes with respect to legal interests when it purchased the right to corn from the same batch as Bathilda and agreed to be bound by the contract.  But Tonks’ 50,000 bushels are probably a different claim from Bathilda’s 50,000 bushels; although Gonzalez is to the contrary, a holding of same claim here would inhibit a market for corn (like bonds).  The fact that some corn is substandard does not necessarily mean that other corn is substandard, suggesting a degree of factual separation.

Question 2

Florean can sue Bathilda, Tonks, and Chang for a declaratory judgment of no breach of contract or, in the alternative, that Change is responsible for any breach (because of tortious interference) in a single federal court lawsuit.  Breach of contract and tortious interference are state-law claims, so there is no AUJ.  Complete diversity exists (Florean = OR, Bathilda = DE & CA, Tonks = DE & ID, Chang = DE & WA), but the dispute with Tonks is only $37,500.00 < $75K, so that claim would have to be supplemental to either the Bathilda (AIC = $112,500 > $75K) or the Chang (AIC = $150K > $75K) dispute.  The Tonks dispute is easily part of the same case or controversy as the Bathilda dispute (same corn harvest and shipment), 1367(a), and no 1367(c) factor suggests refusal to exercise supplemental jurisdiction.  But this would be a claim by a plaintiff (Florean) against a person (Tonks) made a party under FRCP 20, which would appear to be prohibited by 1367(b).  There a miniscule hope that a court would allow the suit on the theory that all that Exxon/1367(a-b) focused on was complete diversity (per the Exxon contamination passage).  The better argument is that this is a declaratory judgment suit, and the coercive action/imaginary lawsuit would have been a multi-plaintiff (Bathilda, Tonks) suit against Florean, permissible under Exxon’s interpretation of the 1367.

Under FRCP 20, Florean’s claim against Bathilda, Tonks, and Chang probably arise from the same transaction or occurrence (note that this means the scope of the T&O test under Rule 20 is probably different from the T&O test for claim preclusion, which makes sense given that Rule 20 is for litigation efficiency, and the clam preclusion in this situation is concerned with markets) in the sense of a common corn shipment affected by a common bridge closure. There are common issues relating to each of the defendants, including the legality and effect of the bridge closure.  If necessary, Florean could sue Bathilda and Tonks for a declaratory judgment, wait for them to counterclaim under FRCP 13, then implead Chang under Rule 14 to shift liability.

Florean can sue all three in D. DE. for sure, perhaps also in D. OR.  Under 4(k)(1)(A), there would be no IPJ over Bathilda or Tonks in Idaho (no indication of any contacts), no IPJ over Chang in California (only does business in OR and WA), and no IPJ over Bathilda in WA (no indication of any contacts).  DE has GIPJ over all three, the state of incorporation, and thus 1391(b)(1) venue.  OR’s long-arm goes to the limits of the constitution.  Minimal contacts exist as to Bathilda (purposeful availment to do business via a contract with Florean) and Chang (bridge job in Hogsmeade).  Tonks, which never directly contracted with an OR entity is less clear.  The best argument is that it agreed to be bound by a contract with an OR farmer knowing that it would need direct interaction with that OR farmer (the decision to accept/reject the corn).  If minimal contacts over Tonks were found, it would be fair and reasonable for OR to exercise IPJ because the key events of the bridge closure occurred there (thus evidence located there), plus OR has an interest in providing Florean, an OR resident, a convenient forum and in regulating the bridge closure events.  The bridge closure would provide 1391(b)(2) venue in D. OR.

D. DE would be a better place to file than D. OR.  IPJ & venue in D. DE. are beyond question there.  Under Klaxon, D. OR would apply OR’s R1 HCOL rules.  The last event necessary to give rise to the alleged breach of contract, and thus Chang’s derivative liability, was the Letter, which occurred (was delivered) in CA.  But CA requires intentionality for a tortious interference claim, and the facts probably do not support the theory that Chang intentionally interference with the Florean-Bathilda/Tonks contracts.  Edgecombe showed negligent indifference to the damage she could cause farmers by not scheduling the bridge repairs in the winter at time with no harvest, but did not intend to cause the harm.  Delaware, however, is an HCOL R2 state, which would start with a presumption of CA law, but would look to the center of gravity of the relationship between, and events linking, Florean and Chang.  That’s OR, where the bridge closure occurred.  Per Babcock, OR has a much stronger interest in regulating the legality of conduct that occurred in OR, and OR has an interest in protecting an OR resident.  OR requires only negligence.

The preliminary injunction motion will be denied because there is no irreparable harm.  This is a standard commercial dispute about a fungible commodity (corn), and damages or the lack thereof are enough to redress any wrongs. There is no need for urgency.  Florean might be likely to succeed on the merits (because of the three experts).  It’s hard to see how the balance of the equities in this private commercial tips in one way or the other.  For the same reason, the public interest is unaffected, and thus does not counsel for an injunction.

Re the class action, Florean is diverse from Chang (Ben-Hur) and has more than $75K at issue, providing the anchor for SSMJ over the unnamed class members’ suits (Exxon).  There is IPJ D. Or and 1391(b)(2) venue over all plaintiffs’ actions because of the bridge closure issue common to all.  On the class certification motion, we have numerosity (45 is too many for joinder), and Florean’s claim is probably representative and typical of the class because he suffered from the same event as they did, but it is unlikely that common issues predominate (predominance swallows commonality in this (b)(3) damages class) or that the class action is superior.  Although the bridge closure is common to all class members, the underlying contracts likely all have different contract terms about excuse; and the crops at issue have different prices, different markets, and would have different spoilage rates after two weeks in the sun.

Question 3

(Policy Question, lots of ways to go)

Matthews v. Eldridge reflects an exclusive focus on cost and accuracy.  The FLDRA online dispute resolution system could reduce litigation costs for the judiciary and parties by eliminating discovery, hearings, and appeals (items the R2 Judgments deemed superfluous to a PDP-providing scheme), and by allowing electronic litigation from one’s living room.  The scheme should be speedier than Article 3 courts.  Issues of public import will rarely arise in the kind of private commercial disputes likely to fill most of the divisions’ dockets.  The relaxation of the rules of evidence and the other formality-driving trappings of the proceedings, as well as the online submission of all documents and evidence, should promote access to justice for small businesses who struggle to afford lawyers.  Online notice is long overdue (the law in this area must evolve, see Flowers, regular versus certified mail).

The cost in accuracy of adjudication is hard to predict.  Live testimony versus written transcripts is an unresolved battle.  The elimination of discovery might tilt adjudication results towards defendants, as plaintiffs often have greater need for discovery, but by how much?  Specialized judges may gain expertise and thus accuracy (but weren’t state judges already expert on these mostly state-law commercial cases?).

There are at least reasons to question this scheme, apart from concerns of cost and accuracy.  Issues of public import (constitutional issues) will sometimes arise, and when they do, there is no requirement of a written justifications (see Rule 52 justifications) and no appeal to allow orderly development of the law.  Next, the prohibition of joinder and class actions may make some adjudication less efficient and decrease access to justice for those with low-value claims.  Finally, are disputes related to goods related to federal public land a priority for access to justice and efficiency?  Some such disputes will involve small farmers who might struggle to afford lawyers, but commercial entities can better afford and navigate ordinary litigation than low-income individuals.  The commercial disputes likely to dominate the agency’s docket usually involve contractual relationships, in which case the parties can contract for arbitration or other cost-reducing adjudicatory procedures.  Why here?

Question 4

Regarding Erie, and limitations, the outcome-determinative test suggests using state law because the case would be dismissed under federal law and would continue under state law.  The Harlan analysis depends on whether one thinks that limitations periods affect investment strategies (if yes, then use state law, if no, then use federal) or other prelitigation conduct.  The problems are with Hanna majority.  Under the Scalia approach, if one uses the Sibbach test to interpret the “abridge, enlarge, modify” language in Section 32 (tracking 2072), then the FLDRA limitations period is validly promulgated under the statute and obviously applicable.  Under Ginsburgh’s approach, it is hard to see how to render the limitations period inapplicable, and a holding that limitations periods involve substantive rights (per York) would suggest that it is invalid under Section 32.

Stepping back, the overarching problem is that we don’t have an Erie framework applicable to an agency regulation.  Erie’s federalism rationale suggests that the source of the federal law at issue should not matter, but Hanna and history contradict this rationale.  The equal protection rationale is fully applicable to the present fact pattern because a plaintiff can file in state court or the FLDRA, so the plaintiff has a choice of what law to apply even in cases outside of a defendant’s home state (assuming Article 3 power under Osborne).  But, again, the equal protection rationale simply reasks the question how much vertical disuniformity we can tolerate.  Section 30(c) mirrors the Rules of Decision Act, and Section 32 mirrors the REA, so the statutory/what-is-law rationales are fully operational.  But again, how does this apply to an agency regulation?  The transplantation of the permissive Sibbach test to the FLDRA framework would allow the agency to promulgate anything arguably procedural.  While the Sibbach test is atextual and theoretically unsatisfying, it seems to work reasonably well with the federal courts, and might function well here.  We need a theory of the importance of state law in the administrative state.
