---
title: "Overview of the Transfer Statutes – 28 U.S.C. §§ 1404(a), 1406(a), 1631"
source: "primers/original/60.  28 USC §§ 1404(a), 1406(a), 1631 (1).docx"
extracted_date: 2026-04-17
extraction_method: docx
---

# Overview of the Transfer Statutes (§§ 1404(a), 1406(a), and 1631)

## Transfer: An introduction

We've seen how personal jurisdiction and venue pin down where you can file a case. These rules suggest two questions. First, what happens if the plaintiff files a case in a district where they're not allowed to (i.e., where there's either no personal jurisdiction or where venue is improper)? For example, suppose you hit me with your car in Cambridge and I sue you in the Northern District of Texas, where you've never been in your life. Second, what happens if the plaintiff could file in multiple districts (i.e., if multiple districts satisfy personal jurisdiction and venue) and the plaintiff files in one that makes way less sense than the alternatives? Continuing the previous example, suppose that you, me, the car, and all witnesses are in Cambridge—but I sue you where you're domiciled, in the District of Hawaii.

In both cases, a court might be able to transfer the case to a district that's permissible or one that just makes more sense. Suppose you're a judge thinking about transferring a case to another district. We'll break your process down into four steps:

1. Must I transfer (or dismiss)?
2. May I transfer?
3. Should I transfer?
4. What happens if I do transfer?

Those questions are (mostly) answered by the statutes you're reading for class, with the cases providing important gloss.

## Must I transfer (or dismiss)?

We'll navigate these questions with a Greiner-ism (which I made up for this class; if you use it elsewhere, people will look at you funny). If a court has personal jurisdiction and is a proper venue, we'll call it a "happy court." As we've seen, only a court that is happy can hear the merits of a case. Thus, if the plaintiff files in an unhappy court, the court must get rid of the case somehow. It could dismiss. Or it could transfer it to another district. Which one it does will depend on the answer to the next question.

## May I transfer?

The venue statutes say that a case may only be transferred to a district in which the case could originally have been filed. So whether you can transfer depends on whether there is any such district—in other words, on whether there is a happy court out there somewhere. If there is, then the original court will likely transfer to the happy court. But if not, then the original court can neither hear the case nor transfer it somewhere else. As a result, it must dismiss.

Section 1631 gives this rule when the original court lacks personal jurisdiction: "Whenever a civil action is filed in a court . . . and that court finds that there is a want of jurisdiction, the court shall, if it is in the interest of justice, transfer such action . . . to any other . . . court . . . in which the action . . . could have been brought at the time it was filed [i.e., to a happy court], and the action . . . shall proceed as if it had been filed in . . . the court to which it is transferred . . . ." And § 1406(a) says to do the same thing if the original court can't lay venue: "The district court of a district in which is filed a case laying venue in the wrong . . . district shall dismiss, or if it be in the interest of justice, transfer such case to any district . . . in which it could have been brought."

For example, suppose Lovejoy (Kansas citizen) hits Kent (Nebraska citizen) with his car in Kansas. Kent sues Lovejoy in the District of South Carolina. This court is unhappy (it lacks IPJ and can't lay venue), so it must transfer or dismiss. To figure out which option to pick, it asks, "May I transfer?" and looks around for a happy court. It sees that the District of Kansas would be happy—it has general and specific IPJ and can lay venue under §§ 1391(b)(1) and 1391(b)(2)—and so it will transfer the case there.

But now suppose that Lovejoy sues Kent (still a Nebraska citizen) and Krusty Korp., the corporation that made Kent's car (a Delaware corporation with its principal place of business in Delaware that only sells cars in Delaware). Lovejoy sues both these defendants, once again, in the District of South Carolina. The court is unhappy, so it looks for a happy court to which it can transfer. But no such court exists. The only district in which Lovejoy can sue Krusty Korp. is the District of Delaware (no other state has personal jurisdiction). But that district cannot exercise personal jurisdiction over Kent nor is it a proper venue as to him. Since the court can neither hear the case nor transfer, it must dismiss.

"May I transfer?" is at the heart of *Hoffman v. Blaski*.

## Should I transfer?

We've seen that if a court is unhappy, it must transfer or dismiss. But what if there are multiple happy courts, the plaintiff files in one of them, and the defendant files a motion to transfer to a different happy court? Should the court transfer?

The venue statutes are a bit cryptic here. They tell you to transfer if doing so is "in the interest of justice" (§§ 1404(a), 1406(a), and 1631 all say that).

Question: How do we figure out if a transfer would be "in the interest of justice?" It turns out, as we'll see in class, that we use the forum non conveniens rules from *Gulf Oil Corp. v. Gilbert* and *Piper Aircraft v. Reyno*.

## What happens if I do transfer?

We know that a federal court sitting in diversity will use the horizontal choice-of-law rules of the state in which it sits.

Question: What happens if the case has been transferred from another state—say, the case was filed in Massachusetts and transferred to California? Will the California court apply the choice-of-law rules of Massachusetts (where the case was filed) or its own rules? Our answer is in *Ferens v. John Deere*. Tl;dr: We'll use the "Greiner happy court rule." If the original court from which the case was transferred (the "transferor court") was happy, its choice-of-law rules follow the case to its next destination. If the transferor court was unhappy, then the court to which the case was transferred (the "transferee court") applies its own choice-of-law rules as if the case had been filed there originally.

## Wrapping it up

We've seen the four questions to ask about transfer and previewed the answers.

**Must I transfer (or dismiss)?**
- If the court is happy (IPJ + venue) → you don't need to transfer or dismiss
- If the court is unhappy (no IPJ or can't lay venue) → you must transfer or dismiss

**May I transfer? (*Hoffman v. Blaski*)**
- If there's a happy court you could transfer to → you may transfer to that court
- If not → you may not transfer

**Should I transfer?**
- If doing so is in the interest of justice

**What happens if I transfer? (*Ferens v. John Deere*)**
- Greiner happy court rule
