---
title: "Day 10"
source: casebook/original/Greiner Civil Procedure Version 02_annotated.docx
extracted_date: 2026-04-02
day: 10
sections:
  - "Rules and Statutes"
  - "Notice and Service of Process"
  - "Video (12 min)"
  - "Guaranty Trust Co. v. York"
  - "Notes following York"
  - "Erie Board Notes"
  - "The Rules Enabling Act"
  - "Hanna v. Plumer"
  - "Notes following Hanna"
  - "Walker v. Armco Steel Corp."
  - "Notes following Walker"
  - "Stewart Organization, Inc. v. Ricoh Corp."
  - "Notes following Stewart"
  - "Not a Study Guide Handouts"
  - "Class 12 Oral Argument Video (8 min)"
---


# Day 10


10.1

### Rules and Statutes


Read the following Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and statutes. You can access them via the internet or the supplemental handout provided on Canvas.

Fed. R. Civ. P. 3
Fed. R. Civ. P. 4(m)
Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(a)(1)(A)(i)
28 U.S.C. §§ 2071-72, plus short explanation in "Explanation of Statutes" in the "Course Materials" Folder on Canvas

10.2

### Notice and Service of Process


This section explains the relationship between the Due Process Clause’s notice requirement and the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure’s service of process requirements. A downloadable handout is available  (Word doc).

The constitutional notice requirement and the statutory service of process requirements concern the same element of a suit: the plaintiff and the state must make some effort to notify the defendant that a suit has been filed against him/her. This effort to notify must be made before adverse consequences can be imposed on the defendant.

**Constitutional requirements for notice**
The Due Process Clause requires that parties be afforded procedural due process, including notice and an opportunity to be heard. As the Court wrote in *Mullane*, “An elementary and fundamental requirement of due process…is notice reasonably calculated, under all the circumstances, to apprise interested parties of the pendency of the action and afford them an opportunity to present their objections.” *Mullane v. Central Hanover Bank*, 339 U.S. 306, 314 (1950). The Due Process Clause does *not* require actual notice to the defendant; it requires only that the plaintiff and the state make reasonable efforts to give notice. Operationalize the *Mullane* standard by considering what the plaintiff would need to do if he/she *actually* wanted to notify the defendant without going to extraordinary effort.

**Rule-based requirements for service of process**
Service of process is the term used to describe the delivery of the legal documents (usually the summons and the complaint) that notify the defendant that he/she has been sued and inform him/her that the court is asserting its jurisdiction over the controversy.
For a lawsuit to proceed in a federal court, the plaintiff (sometimes assisted by a court officer, often called a “sheriff”) must serve process in accordance with the requirements imposed by statute or rule. If service of process is not made properly but the defendant finds out about the suit through other means, he/she can move to dismiss the suit for insufficient service of process. Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(5).  Keep your eye on this because it is counterintuitive: a court will dismiss a lawsuit, even if the defendant in fact knows about the lawsuit, because the plaintiff failed to meet the service of process rules (which are, in fact, designed to ensure that the defendant finds out about the lawsuit).
Rule 4 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure governs the service of process in federal courts.  It addresses which documents must be served on the defendant, who may serve the defendant, how and when the papers must be served, and how the service requirement can be waived (which we will not cover):             
**Serving process on an individual**: Rule 4(e)
Under Rule 4(e)(1), an individual may be served in accordance with the rules of the state in which the federal court is located or the state in which the service is made. In other words, if the state says it is okay to serve process by some method, then that is fine for the relevant federal court.
Alternatively, under Rule 4(e)(2), one can serve process by:
(A) Delivering copies of the summons and the complaint to the defendant;
(B) Leaving copies of those documents at the defendant’s dwelling with someone who lives there and is of suitable age;
(C) Or delivering copies to an agent appointed by the defendant or authorized by law to receive service of process.
**Serving process on a corporation**, a partnership, or an unincorporated association: Rule 4(h)
Rule 4(h)(1) governs if the corporation is served in a U.S. judicial district (*e.g.*, in the country). That is all we study here in Civil Procedure (read the rule if you want to learn about service outside the U.S.).
(A) Service must be made in accordance with the state laws where the federal court sits or where process is served. In other words, if the state says it is okay to serve process by some method, then that is fine for the relevant federal court;
(B) Or it must be made by the delivery (by hand, like a tag) of the summons and the complaint to an officer, a managing or general agent, or other authorized agent of the corporation. Mail delivery to the defendant may also be necessary if the statute requires it.

**Relationship between the constitutional and statutory requirements**
As these details show, Rule 4 requires more effort by the plaintiff and the state for a service of process to be valid than what is called for by the Due Process Clause. The Due Process Clause sets the floor, and the Federal Rules substantially heighten the requirements. Put another way, the Constitution establishes a standard of ‘reasonable efforts,’ and the Federal Rules provide a stricter list of specific dos and don’ts.
See the chart below for two other topic areas in which the relationship between constitutional and statutory requirements is the same in the sense that the Constitution sets a floor, and some statute or rule requires ‘more.’

**Service of process and personal jurisdiction**
Remember that notice and service of process are different from personal jurisdiction:
Notice and service of process refer to the efforts that must be made to notify the defendant about the suit against him/her.
Personal jurisdiction refers to the power of a court over the parties in a case. It gives the court the authority to make judgments to which the parties are bound.
These concepts are sometimes confused because prior to the Great Depression, service of process was one method (and under *Pennoyer*, the only method) of establishing personal jurisdiction. However, the Supreme Court articulated new requirements for personal jurisdiction in 1945 in *International Shoe v. Washington*. *International Shoe Co. v. Washington*, 326 U.S. 310 (1945). The *International Shoe* Court held that a court could exercise jurisdiction over an out-of-state defendant as long as the defendant had sufficient minimum contacts with the state that made the exercise of jurisdiction fair and reasonable. Most courts continued to believe, however, that service of process (“tagging”) in a state could still be used to establish personal jurisdiction after *International Shoe*. In *Burnham v. Superior Court*, 495 U.S. 604 (1990), the Court split 4-4-1 (around Justice Stevens) in deciding whether service of process on a nonresident defendant inside the state’s geographic area was enough to establish personal jurisdiction.
Note that today, for a suit to proceed, the constitutional and statutory requirements for notice and service of process must be met *and* the court must have personal jurisdiction.  The two requirements may compel the plaintiff to prove different things, and it is possible for one to be established without the other.

**Chart: Constitutional versus statutory requirements across topic areas**
Notice/service of process is not the only component of a lawsuit in which the statutory requirements go beyond the constitutional requirements. This relationship holds true for subject matter jurisdiction (SMJ) and personal jurisdiction (IPJ), as this chart outlines.
For a suit to proceed in a federal court, both the constitutional requirement(s) and the statutory requirement(s) must be met.

10.3

### Video (12 min)


Watch the video located . It is 12 minutes long.

10.4

### Guaranty Trust Co. v. York


In *Erie*, the Supreme Court abandoned the doctrine of *Swift* and stated that, for multiple reasons, federal courts sitting in diversity should use state law for substantive issues. *Erie* led to many questions, primarily this one: How far did this rule go? Was there anything that was NOT substantive? In other words, were there any issues upon which federal, not state law, would govern in diversity cases? Or is a federal diversity court supposed to follow state law on every issue, including, for example, the size and color of the paper used to file briefs? If not, where was the line between issues governed by state versus federal law? If this line were supposed to track the distinction between substance and procedure, what was "substance" versus "procedure"? What did those terms mean? The Supreme Court had to provide a set of standards, a test, a framework, something!
*Guaranty Trust Co*. was the Supreme Court's first attempt. As you will quickly see, this first attempt did not go well. What test does this case articulate? Why is it, as the Supreme Court itself later recognized, unworkable as a general matter?
The facts in this case are incomprehensible. I have made multiple attempts to understand them, including by reviewing (on multiple occasions) the district and circuit court opinions. All of my attempts have failed. I will explain more in class, but for now, this was an equity suit (you will understand what that means later in the course), with the federal district court sitting in diversity. Federal equity law (meaning common law) did not provide a limitations period for this type of case. State law did provide one, and if that state limitations period applied, the suit was time-barred. The Supreme Court thus had to decide the following question: when no source of federal law (particularly no congressional statute) provides a limitations period for a state law cause of action, but state law does provide one, should the federal courts use federal law or state law?

Supreme Court of the United States
326 U.S. 99, 89 L. Ed. 2079, 65 S. Ct. 1464, 1945 U.S. LEXIS 2665, SCDB 1944-101
No. 264
1945-06-18
326 U.S. 99 (1945)
GUARANTY TRUST CO.
v.
YORK.
No. 264.
Supreme Court of United States.
Argued January 3, 4, 1945.
Decided June 18, 1945.
CERTIORARI TO THE CIRCUIT COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE SECOND CIRCUIT.
[ … ]

#### MR. JUSTICE FRANKFURTER delivered the opinion of the Court.

[ … ]
[ … ]
[ … ]
Our problem only touches transactions for which rights and obligations are created by one of the States, and for the assertion of which, in case of diversity of the citizenship of the parties, Congress has made a federal court another available forum.
Our starting point must be the policy of federal jurisdiction which *Erie R. Co.* v. *Tompkins*[ … ] embodies. In overruling *Swift* v. *Tyson,* [ … ] *Erie R. Co.* v. *Tompkins* did not merely overrule a venerable case. It overruled a particular way of looking at law which dominated the judicial process long after its inadequacies had been laid bare. [ … ] Law was conceived as a "brooding omnipresence" of Reason, of which decisions were merely evidence and not themselves the controlling formulations. Accordingly, federal courts deemed themselves free to ascertain what Reason, and therefore Law, required wholly independent of authoritatively declared State law, even in cases where a legal right as the basis for relief was created by State authority and could not be created by federal authority and the case got into a federal court merely because it was "between Citizens of different States" under Art. III, § 2 of the Constitution of the United States.
This impulse to freedom from the rules that controlled State courts regarding State-created rights was so strongly rooted in the prevailing views concerning the nature of law, that the federal courts almost imperceptibly were led to mutilating construction even of the explicit command given to them by Congress to apply State law in cases purporting to enforce the law of a State. See the Rules of Decision Act. The matter was fairly summarized by the statement that "During the period when *Swift* v. *Tyson* (1842-1938) ruled the decisions of the federal courts, its theory of their freedom in matters of general law from the authority of state courts pervaded opinions of this Court involving even state statutes or local law." [ … ]
In relation to the problem now here, the real significance of *Swift* v. *Tyson* lies in the fact that it did not enunciate novel doctrine. [ … ][ … ] [ … ]Since it was conceived that there was "a transcendental body of law outside of any particular State but obligatory within it unless and until changed by statute," [ … ], State court decisions were not "the law" but merely someone's opinion — to be sure an opinion to be respected — concerning the content of this all-pervading law. Not unnaturally, the federal courts assumed power to find for themselves the content of such a body of law. [ … ]
In exercising their jurisdiction on the ground of diversity of citizenship, the federal courts, in the long course of their history, have not differentiated in their regard for State law between actions at law and suits in equity.* [ … ]
In giving federal courts "cognizance" of equity suits in cases of diversity jurisdiction, Congress never gave, nor did the federal courts ever claim, the power to deny substantive rights created State law or to create substantive rights denied by State law.
This does not mean that whatever equitable remedy is available in a State court must be available in a diversity suit in a federal court, or conversely, that a federal court may not afford an equitable remedy not available in a State court. [ … ] State law cannot define the remedies which a federal court must give simply because a federal court in diversity jurisdiction is available as an alternative tribunal to the State's courts. Contrariwise, a federal court may afford an equitable remedy for a substantive right recognized by a State even though a State court cannot give it. Whatever contradiction or confusion may be produced by a medley of judicial phrases severed from their environment, the body of adjudications concerning equitable relief in diversity cases leaves no doubt that the federal courts enforced State-created substantive rights if the mode of proceeding and remedy were consonant with the traditional body of equitable remedies, practice and procedure, and in so doing [ … ] they were enforcing rights created by the States and not arising under any inherent or statutory federal law.
Inevitably, therefore, the principle of *Erie R. Co.* v. *Tompkins,* an action at law, was promptly applied to a suit in equity. [ … ]
And so this case reduces itself to the narrow question whether, when no recovery could be had in a State court because the action is barred by the statute of limitations, a federal court in equity can take cognizance of the suit because there is diversity of citizenship between the parties. [ … ]
Matters of "substance" and matters of "procedure" are much talked about in the books as though they defined a great divide cutting across the whole domain of law. But, of course, "substance" and "procedure" are the same key-words to very different problems. Neither "substance" nor "procedure" represents the same invariants. Each implies different variables depending upon the particular problem for which it is used. [ … ]
Here we are dealing with a right to recover derived not from the United States but from one of the States. When, because the plaintiff happens to be a non-resident, such a right is enforceable in a federal as well as in a State court, the forms and mode of enforcing the right may at times, naturally enough, vary because the two judicial systems are not identic. But since a federal court adjudicating a State-created right solely because of the diversity of citizenship of the parties is for that purpose, in effect, only another court of the State, it cannot afford recovery [ … ] if the right to recover is made unavailable by the State nor can it substantially affect the enforcement of the right as given by the State.
And so the question is not whether a statute of limitations is deemed a matter of "procedure" in some sense. The question is whether such a statute concerns merely the manner and the means by which a right to recover, as recognized by the State, is enforced, or whether such statutory limitation is a matter of substance in the aspect that alone is relevant to our problem, namely, does it significantly affect the result of a litigation for a federal court to disregard a law of a State that would be controlling in an action upon the same claim by the same parties in a State court?
It is therefore immaterial whether statutes of limitation are characterized either as "substantive" or "procedural" in State court opinions in any use of those terms unrelated to the specific issue before us. *Erie R. Co.* v. *Tompkins* was not an endeavor to formulate scientific legal terminology. It expressed a policy that touches vitally the proper distribution of judicial power between State and federal courts. In essence, the intent of that decision was to insure that, in all cases where a federal court is exercising jurisdiction solely because of the diversity of citizenship of the parties, the outcome of the litigation in the federal court should be substantially the same, so far as legal rules determine the outcome of a litigation, as it would be if tried in a State court. The nub of the policy that underlies *Erie R. Co.* v. *Tompkins* is that for the same transaction the accident of a suit by a non-resident litigant in a federal court instead of in a State court a block away should not lead to a substantially different result. And so, putting to one side abstractions regarding "substance" and "procedure," we have held that in diversity cases the federal courts must follow the law of the State as to burden of proof, [ … ], as to conflict of laws, *Klaxon Co.* v. *Stentor Co.,* [ … ], as to contributory negligence, [ … ]. *Erie R. Co.* v. *Tompkins* has been applied with an eye alert to essentials in avoiding disregard of State law in diversity cases in the federal courts. A policy so important to our federalism must be kept free from entanglements with analytical or terminological niceties.
Plainly enough, a statute that would completely bar recovery in a suit if brought in a State court bears on a State-created right vitally and not merely formally or negligibly. As to consequences that so intimately affect recovery or non-recovery a federal court in a diversity case should follow State law. [ … ]
Diversity jurisdiction is founded on assurance to non-resident litigants of courts free from susceptibility to potential local bias. [ … ]And so Congress afforded out-of-State litigants another tribunal, not another body of law. The operation of a double system of conflicting laws in the same State is plainly hostile to the reign of law. Certainly, the fortuitous circumstance of residence out of a State of one of the parties to a litigation ought not to give rise to a discrimination against others equally concerned but locally resident. The source of substantive rights enforced by a federal court under diversity jurisdiction, it cannot be said too often, is the law of the States. Whenever that law is authoritatively declared by a State, whether its voice be the legislature or its highest court, such law ought to govern in litigation founded on that law, whether the forum of application is a State or a federal court and whether the remedies be sought at law or may be had in equity.
[ … ]
The judgment is reversed and the case is remanded for proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.
*So ordered.*
MR. JUSTICE ROBERTS and MR. JUSTICE DOUGLAS took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.

#### MR. JUSTICE RUTLEDGE.

[ … ]**
[ … ]thisOne may give full adherence to the rule of *Erie R. Co.* v. *Tompkins,* [ … ] and its extension to cases in equity in so far as they affect clearly substantive rights, without conceding or assuming that the long tradition, both federal and state, which regards statutes of limitations as falling within the category of remedial rather than substantive law, necessarily must be ruled in the same way; and without conceding further that only a different jurisprudential climate or a kind of "brooding omnipresence in the sky" [ … ] has dictated the hitherto unvaried policy of the federal courts in their general attitude toward the strict application of local statutes of limitations in equity causes.
[ … ]
The decision of today does not in so many words rule that Congress could not authorize the federal courts to administer equitable relief in accordance with the substantive rights of the parties, notwithstanding state courts had been forbidden by local statutes of limitations to do so. Nevertheless the implication to that effect seems strong, in view of the reliance upon *Erie R. Co.* v. *Tompkins**.* [ … ]Mor***e is at stake in the implications of the decision, if not in the words of the opinion, than simply bringing federal and local law into accord upon matters clearly and exclusively within the constitutional power of the state to determine. It is one thing to require that kind of an accord in diversity cases when the question is merely whether the federal court must follow the law of the state as to burden of proof, [ … ] contributory negligence, [ … ]or perhaps in application of the so-called parol evidence rule. These ordinarily involve matters of substantive law, though nominated in terms of procedure. But in some instances their application may lie along the border between procedure or remedy and substance, where the one may or may not be in fact but another name for the other. It is exactly in this borderland, where procedural or remedial rights may or may not have the effect of determining the substantive ones completely, that caution is required in extending the rule of the *Erie* case by the very rule itself.
The words "substantive" and "procedural" or "remedial" are not talismanic. Merely calling a legal question by one or the other does not resolve it otherwise than as a purely authoritarian performance. But they have come to designate in a broad way large and distinctive legal domains within the greater one of the law and to mark, though often indistinctly or with overlapping limits, many divides between such regions.
One of these historically has been the divide between the substantive law and the procedural or remedial law to be applied by the federal courts in diversity cases, a division sharpened but not wiped out by *Erie R. Co.* v. *Tompkins* and subsequent decisions extending the scope[ … ]of its ruling. The large division between adjective law and substantive law still remains, to divide the power of Congress from that of the states and consequently to determine the power of the federal courts to apply federal law or state law in diversity matters.
This division, like others drawn by the broad allocation of adjective or remedial and substantive, has areas of admixture of these two aspects of the law. In these areas whether a particular situation or issue presents one aspect or the other depends upon how one looks at the matter. As form cannot always be separated from substance in a work of art, so adjective or remedial aspects cannot be parted entirely from substantive ones in these borderland regions.
Whenever this integration or admixture prevails in a substantial measure, so that a clean break cannot be made, there is danger either of nullifying the power of Congress to control not only how the federal courts may act, but what they may do by way of affording remedies, or of usurping that function, if the *Erie* doctrine is to be expanded judicially to include such situations to the utmost extent.
It may be true that if the matter were wholly fresh the barring of rights in equity by statutes of limitation would seem to partake more of the substantive than of the remedial phase of law. But the matter is not fresh and it is not without room for debate. A long tradition, in the states and here, as well as in the common law which antedated both state and federal law, has emphasized the remedial character of statutes of limitations, more especially in application to equity causes, on many kinds of issues requiring differentiation of such matters from more clearly and exclusively substantive ones.**** [ … ]I cannot say the tradition is clearly wrong in this case [ … ]
Applicable statutes of limitations in state tribunals are not always the ones which would apply if suit were instituted in the courts of the state which creates the substantive rights for which enforcement is sought. The state of the forum is free to apply its own period of limitations, regardless of whether the state originating the right has barred suit upon it*****.Whether or not *the action* will be held to be barred depends therefore not upon the law of the state which creates the substantive right, but upon the law of the state where suit may be brought. This in turn will depend upon where it may be possible to secure [ … ] jurisdiction of the person of the defendant. It may be therefore that because of the plaintiff's inability to find the defendant in the jurisdiction which creates his substantive right, he will be foreclosed of remedy by the sheer necessity of going to the haven of refuge within which the defendant confines its "presence" for jurisdictional purposes. The law of the latter may bar the suit even though suit still would be allowed under the law of the state creating the substantive right.
[ … ]
MR. JUSTICE MURPHY joins in this opinion.
[ … ]

10.5

### Notes following York


Pay close attention to *Ragan* and *Cohen* in note 4.

Are statutes of limitations substantive or procedural? We talked about this in our HCOL class.  What did you think then?  Did either Justice Frankfurter's majority opinion or Justice Rutledge's dissent change your mind?  Do you think statutes of limitations are substantive, procedural, or a mix of both?  If you think a mix of both, how is a court to resolve a conflict of laws question, either horizontal or vertical, when it has to make a binary choice?
If a New York court would not have granted equitable relief, should a federal court have done so if it were sitting in diversity? Does Justice Frankfurter’s distinction between a state-created right and remedy help answer this question? Are rights defined independent of remedies, or do the scope of remedies define rights?
Does *York* actually displace a federal law? Which one, and what is that law's origin?  Does the Court’s holding depend on the Rules Enabling Act or a different source of power?
Four years after *York,* the Supreme Court decided two more *Erie* cases on the same day. It may help you to diagram the timelines of these cases:
*Ragan v. Merchants Transfer & Warehouse Co.*, 337 U.S. 530 (1949). Following a highway accident on October 1, 1942, Ragan filed a suit in federal court in Kansas under diversity jurisdiction on September 4, 1945, but service was not made on the defendant until December 28. Kansas had a two year statute of limitations on Ragan’s claim, and its applicable "tolling" period (see the *Erie* board notes below) was shorter than that available under federal law.  The Supreme Court held that state law controlled when the limitations period was tolled. According to Justice Douglas, “[s]ince that cause of action is created by local law, the measure of it is to be found only in local law. … It accrues and comes to an end when local law so declares.”
*Cohen v. Beneficial Industrial Loan Corp.*, 337 U.S. 541 (1949). Justice Jackson, writing for the Court, found that federal courts must apply state statutes regarding litigation bond requirements in shareholders derivative suits, even though Federal Rule 23.1 did not require a bond. According to Justice Jackson, though the state law requiring the plaintiff to post a litigation bond was procedural, it created substantive liabilities for the parties. Justices Douglas and Rutledge wrote dissents, the latter worrying that such a decision moved power over diversity jurisdiction away from Congress and to the states.
*York* seems to stand for the proposition that if a legal rule would affect a suit’s result, a federal court sitting in diversity should apply state law. Doesn't that lead to the conclusion that a court should *always* apply state law? Does this include rules about the size and color of paper? What did Justice Frankfurter really mean by “outcome determinative”?
Carried to its logical conclusion, *York* ends any hope of uniformity across federal district courts, even as to matters that everyone (prior to *York*) had considered procedural. Does this seem good? Does this further the goals of *Erie*?

10.6

### Erie Board Notes


Please review the handout on *Erie* found  (pdf).

10.7

### The Rules Enabling Act


A downloadable handout version of this section is available  (Word doc).

**How the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure are amended:**
Together, U.S.C. 28 § 2071 and § 2072 constitute the Rules Enabling Act of 1934. These provisions empower the Supreme Court to promulgate the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. The Supreme Court delegated the role of drafting the Rules to an Advisory Committee, which drafted the original Rules. Today, advisory committees continue to propose amendments to the Rules in accordance with the process outlined below. This seven-step process by which the Rules are amended looks first like administrative rulemaking (steps 1-5), then like judge-made common law (step 6), and then legislation (step 7).  As we will discuss in class, how one characterizes the rules (rulemaking, common law, or legislation) matters in terms of how one should think about them for *Erie* purposes.

**Step 1: Initial Consideration by the Advisory Committee**
Proposed changes to the rules are suggested by judges, clerks of court, lawyers, professors, government agencies, or other individuals and organizations. 
These suggestions are considered by the appropriate advisory committee (appellate, bankruptcy, civil, criminal, or evidence). 
*Advisory committees* are composed of federal judges, practicing lawyers, law professors, state chief justices, representatives of the Department of Justice, and a reporter (usually a prominent law professor).
**Step 2: Publication and Public Comment**
Once an advisory committee votes to recommend an amendment to the rules, it must obtain the approval of the Standing Committee to publish the proposed amendment for public comment. 
The *Standing Committee* is composed of federal judges, practicing lawyers, law professors, state chief justices, representatives of the Department of Justice, and an academic reporter. 
With the Standing Committee’s approval, the proposed amendment is published for a 6-month period of public comment. 
**Step 3: Consideration of the public comments and final approval by the advisory committee**
The advisory committee takes another look at the proposed rule changes in light of the public comments. If the advisory committee decides to make a substantial change, it may provide for an additional period of public comment. 
The advisory committee submits its proposed amendment to the Standing Committee.
**Step 4: Approval by the Standing Committee**
The Standing Committee considers the final recommendations of the advisory committee. If the Standing Committee approves a proposed rule change, it transmits it to the Judicial Conference with a recommendation for approval. 
**Step 5: Judicial Conference Approval**** **
The Judicial Conference considers proposed amendments to the rules at its annual September session. Amendments it approves are transmitted to the Supreme Court.
The *Judicial Conference* is composed of the chief judge of each judicial circuit, the Chief Judge of the Court of International Trade, and a district judge from each regional judicial circuit. The Chief Justice of the United States is the presiding officer of the Judicial Conference.
**Step 6: Supreme Court approval**
The Supreme Court has the authority to prescribe the federal rules, subject to a statutory waiting period. 28 U.S.C. §§ 2072, 2075. The Court must transmit proposed amendments to Congress by May 1 of the year in which the amendment is to take effect. 28 U.S.C. §§ 2074, 2075. The Court votes in its usual format to decide what to transmit (meaning a five-justice majority is required).
**Step 7: Congressional review**
Congress has a statutory period of at least 7 months to act on any rules prescribed by the Supreme Court. If Congress does not enact legislation to reject, modify, or defer the rules, they take effect as a matter of law on December 1. 28 U.S.C. §§ 2074, 2075.
**Why does this matter? **
*Erie*, *Stewart*, *Hanna*, and *Walker* (see below for the latter three) together suggest that courts should treat federal statutes differently from federal common law in diversity cases.  The problem is that the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure are part statute, part common law (and part administrative rule).  So, how do courts treat the Rules for *Erie* purposes?

10.8

### Hanna v. Plumer


Supreme Court of the United States
380 U.S. 460, 14 L. Ed. 2d 8, 85 S. Ct. 1136, SCDB 1964-076, 1965 U.S. LEXIS 1350
No. 171
1965-04-26
380 U.S. 460 (1965)
[ … ]

#### [ … ] MR. CHIEF JUSTICE WARREN delivered the opinion of the Court.

The question to be decided is whether, in a civil action where the jurisdiction of the United States district court is based upon diversity of citizenship between the parties, service of process shall be made in the manner prescribed by state law or that set forth in [Rule 4(e)(2)(B)] of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
On February 6, 1963, petitioner, a citizen of Ohio, filed her complaint in the District Court for the District of Massachusetts, claiming damages in excess of $10,000 for personal injuries resulting from an automobile accident in South Carolina, allegedly caused by the negligence of one Louise Plumer Osgood, a Massachusetts citizen deceased at the time of the filing of the complaint. Respondent, Mrs. Osgood's executor and also a Massachusetts citizen, was named as defendant. On February 8, service was made by leaving copies of the summons and the complaint with respondent's wife at his residence, concededly in compliance with Rule 4 (e)(2)(B) which provides:
> "The summons and complaint shall be served together. The plaintiff shall furnish the person making service with such copies as are necessary. Service shall be made as follows:
> [the current version of the rule, which is the same in substance as the version then extant, allows service to be made "leaving a copy of each at the individual's dwelling or usual place of abode with someone of suitable age and discretion who resides there."]
Respondent filed his answer on February 26, alleging, *inter alia,* that the action could not be maintained because it had been brought "contrary to and in violation of the [ … ] provisions of Massachusetts General Laws (Ter. Ed.) Chapter 197, Section 9." That section provides:
> "Except as provided in this chapter, an executor or administrator shall not be held to answer to an action by a creditor of the deceased which is not commenced within one year from the time of his giving bond for the performance of his trust, or to such an action which is commenced within said year unless before the expiration thereof the writ in such action has been served by delivery in hand upon such executor or administrator or service thereof accepted by him or a notice stating the name of the estate, the name and address of the creditor, the amount of the claim and the court in which the action has been brought has been filed in the proper registry of probate. . . ." Mass. Gen. Laws Ann., c. 197, § 9 (1958).
On October 17, 1963, the District Court granted respondent's motion for summary judgment, citing *Ragan* v. *Merchants Transfer Co.,* [ … ]and *Guaranty Trust Co.* v. *York,* [ … ], in support of its conclusion that the adequacy of the service was to be measured by § 9, with which, the court held, petitioner had not complied. On appeal, petitioner admitted noncompliance with § 9, but argued that Rule 4 (e)(2)(B) defines the method by which service of process is to be effected in diversity actions. The Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, finding that "[r]elatively recent amendments [to § 9] evince a clear legislative purpose to require personal notification within the year," concluded that the conflict of state [ … ] and federal rules was over "a substantive rather than a procedural matter," and unanimously affirmed. [ … ]. Because of the threat to the goal of uniformity of federal procedure posed by the decision below, we granted certiorari[ … ]
We conclude that the adoption of Rule 4 (e)(2)(B), designed to control service of process in diversity actions, neither exceeded the congressional mandate embodied in the Rules Enabling Act nor transgressed constitutional bounds, and that the Rule is therefore the standard against which the District Court should have measured the adequacy of the service. Accordingly, we reverse the decision of the Court of Appeals.
The Rules Enabling Act, 28 U. S. C. § 2072 (1958 ed.), provides, in pertinent part:
> "The Supreme Court shall have the power to prescribe, by general rules, the forms of process, writs, pleadings, and motions, and the practice and procedure of the district courts of the United States in civil actions.
> "Such rules shall not abridge, enlarge or modify any substantive right and shall preserve the right of trial by jury . . . ."
Under the cases construing the scope of the Enabling Act, Rule 4 (e)(2)(B) clearly passes muster. Prescribing the manner in which a defendant is to be notified that a suit has been instituted against him, it relates to the "practice and procedure of the district courts." [ … ]
> "The test must be whether a rule really regulates procedure, —the judicial process for enforcing rights and duties recognized by substantive law and for justly administering remedy and redress for disregard or infraction of them." *Sibbach* v. *Wilson & Co.,* [ … ]
In *Mississippi Pub. Corp.* v. *Murphree*[ … ] this Court upheld Rule 4 (f), which permits service of a summons anywhere within the State (and not merely the district) in which a district court sits:
> "We think that Rule 4 (f) is in harmony with the Enabling Act . . . . Undoubtedly most alterations [ … ] of the rules of practice and procedure may and often do affect the rights of litigants. Congress' prohibition of any alteration of substantive rights of litigants was obviously not addressed to such incidental effects as necessarily attend the adoption of the prescribed new rules of procedure upon the rights of litigants who, agreeably to rules of practice and procedure, have been brought before a court authorized to determine their rights. *Sibbach* v. *Wilson & Co.,* [ … ] The fact that the application of Rule 4 (f) will operate to subject petitioner's rights to adjudication by the district court for northern Mississippi will undoubtedly affect those rights. But it does not operate to abridge, enlarge or modify the rules of decision by which that court will adjudicate its rights." *Id.,* at 445-446.
Thus were there no conflicting state procedure, Rule 4 [ … ] would clearly control. [ … ] However, respondent, focusing on the contrary Massachusetts rule, calls to the Court's attention another line of cases, a line which—like the Federal Rules—had its birth in 1938. [ … ]The broad command of *Erie* was therefore identical to that of the Enabling Act: federal courts are to apply state substantive law and federal procedural law. However, as subsequent cases sharpened the distinction between substance and procedure, the line of cases following *Erie* diverged markedly from the line construing the Enabling Act. *Guaranty Trust Co.* v. *York,* [ … ]made it clear that *Erie*-type problems were not to be solved by [ … ]reference to any traditional or common-sense substance-procedure distinction:
> [ … ]
Respondent, by placing primary reliance on *York* and *Ragan,* suggests that the *Erie* doctrine acts as a check on the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, that despite the clear command of Rule 4 [ … ], *Erie* and its progeny demand the application of the Massachusetts rule. Reduced to essentials, the argument is: (1) *Erie,* as refined in *York,* demands that federal courts apply state law whenever application of federal law in its stead will alter the outcome of the case. (2) In this case, a determination that the Massachusetts service requirements obtain will result in immediate victory for respondent. If, on the other hand, it should be held that Rule 4 [ … ] is applicable, the litigation will continue, with possible victory for petitioner. (3) Therefore, *Erie* demands application of the Massachusetts rule. The syllogism possesses an appealing simplicity, but is for several reasons invalid.
In the first place, it is doubtful that, even if there were no Federal Rule making it clear that in-hand service is not required in diversity actions, the *Erie* rule would have obligated the District Court to follow the Massachusetts procedure. "Outcome-determination" analysis was never [ … ] intended to serve as a talisman*. [ … ].
The *Erie* rule is rooted in part in a realization that it would be unfair for the character or result of a litigation materially to differ because the suit had been brought in a federal court.
> [ … ]
The decision was also in part a reaction to the practice of "forum-shopping" which had grown up in response to the rule of *Swift* v. *Tyson.* 304 U. S., at 73-74.That the *York* test was an attempt to effectuate these policies is demonstrated by the fact that the opinion framed the inquiry in terms of "substantial" variations between state [ … ] and federal litigation. [ … ] Not only are nonsubstantial, or trivial, variations not likely to raise the sort of equal protection problems which troubled the Court in *Erie;* they are also unlikely to influence the choice of a forum. The "outcome-determination" test therefore cannot be read without reference to the twin aims of the *Erie* rule: discouragement of forum-shopping and avoidance of inequitable administration of the laws.
The difference between the conclusion that the Massachusetts rule is applicable, and the conclusion that it is not, is of course at this point "outcome-determinative" in the sense that if we hold the state rule to apply, respondent prevails, whereas if we hold that Rule 4 [ … ] governs, the litigation will continue. But in this sense *every* procedural variation is "outcome-determinative." [ … ] Though choice of the federal or state rule will at this point have a marked effect upon the outcome of the litigation, the difference between the two rules would be of scant, if any, relevance to the choice of a forum. Petitioner, in choosing her forum, was not presented with a situation where application of the state rule would wholly bar recovery; rather, adherence to the state rule would have resulted only in altering the way in which process was served.Moreover, it is difficult to argue that permitting service of defendant's wife to take the place of in-hand service of defendant himself alters the mode of enforcement of state-created rights in a fashion sufficiently "substantial" to raise the sort of equal protection problems to which the *Erie* opinion alluded.
There is, however, a more fundamental flaw in respondent's syllogism: the incorrect assumption that the rule of *Erie R. Co.* v. *Tompkins* constitutes the appropriate test [ … ] of the validity and therefore the applicability of a Federal Rule of Civil Procedure. The *Erie* rule has never been invoked to void a Federal Rule. It is true that there have been cases where this Court has held applicable a state rule in the face of an argument that the situation was governed by one of the Federal Rules. But the holding of each such case was not that *Erie* commanded displacement of a Federal Rule by an inconsistent state rule, but rather that the scope of the Federal Rule was not as broad as the losing party urged, and therefore, there being no Federal Rule which covered the point in dispute, *Erie* commanded the enforcement of state law.
> [ … ]
(Here, of course, the clash is unavoidable; Rule 4 [ … ] says—implicitly, but with unmistakable clarity—that in-hand service is not required in federal courts.) At the same time, in cases adjudicating the validity of Federal Rules, we have not applied the *York* rule or other refinements of *Erie,* but have to this day continued to decide questions concerning the scope of the Enabling Act and the constitutionality of specific Federal Rules in light of [ … ] the distinction set forth in *Sibbach.* [ … ]
Nor has the development of two separate lines of cases been inadvertent. The line between "substance" and "procedure" shifts as the legal context changes. "Each implies different variables depending upon the particular problem for which it is used." [ … ]It is true that both the Enabling Act and the *Erie* rule say, roughly, that federal courts are to apply state "substantive" law and federal "procedural" law, but from that it need not follow that the tests are identical. For they were designed to control very different sorts of decisions. When a situation is covered by one of the Federal Rules, the question facing the court is a far cry from the typical, relatively unguided *Erie* choice: the court has been instructed to apply the Federal Rule, and can refuse to do so only if the Advisory Committee, this Court, and Congress erred in their prima facie judgment that the Rule in question transgresses neither the terms of the Enabling Act nor constitutional restrictions.
We are reminded by the *Erie* opinion that neither Congress nor the federal courts can, under the guise of formulating rules of decision for federal courts, fashion rules which are not supported by a grant of federal authority contained in Article I or some other section of the Constitution; in such areas state law must govern [472] because there can be no other law. But the opinion in *Erie,* which involved no Federal Rule and dealt with a question which was "substantive" in every traditional sense (whether the railroad owed a duty of care to Tompkins as a trespasser or a licensee), surely neither said nor implied that measures like Rule 4 [ … ] are unconstitutional. For the constitutional provision for a federal court system (augmented by the Necessary and Proper Clause) carries with it congressional power to make rules governing the practice and pleading in those courts, which in turn includes a power to regulate matters which, though falling within the uncertain area between substance and procedure, are rationally capable of classification as either. [ … ] Neither *York* nor the cases following it ever suggested that the rule there laid down for coping with situations where no Federal Rule applies is coextensive with the limitation on Congress to which *Erie* had adverted. [ … ]
*Erie* and its offspring cast no doubt on the long-recognized power of Congress to prescribe housekeeping rules for federal courts even though some of those rules will inevitably differ from comparable state rules. [ … ] To hold that a Federal Rule of Civil Procedure must cease to function whenever it alters the mode of enforcing state-created rights would be to disembowel [474] either the Constitution's grant of power over federal procedure or Congress' attempt to exercise that power in the Enabling Act.Rule 4 [ … ] is valid and controls the instant case.
*Reversed.*

#### [ … ]


#### MR. JUSTICE HARLAN, concurring.**

It is unquestionably true that up to now *Erie* and the cases following it have not succeeded in articulating a workable doctrine governing choice of law in diversity actions. I respect the Court's effort to clarify the situation in today's opinion. However, in doing so I think it has misconceived the constitutional premises of *Erie* and has failed to deal adequately with those past decisions upon which the courts below relied.
*Erie* was something more than an opinion which worried about "forum-shopping and avoidance of inequitable administration of the laws," *ante,* [ … ] although to be sure these were important elements of the decision. I have always regarded that decision as one of the modern cornerstones of our federalism, expressing policies that profoundly touch the allocation of judicial power between the state and federal systems. *Erie* recognized that there should not be two conflicting systems of law controlling the primary activity of citizens, for such alternative governing authority must necessarily give rise to a debilitating uncertainty in the planning of everyday affairs. And it recognized that the scheme of our Constitution envisions an allocation of law-making functions between state and federal legislative processes which is undercut if the federal judiciary can make substantive law affecting[ … ] state affairs beyond the bounds of congressional legislative powers in this regard. Thus, in diversity cases *Erie* commands that it be the state law governing primary private activity which prevails.
[ … ]. In turning from the "outcome" test of *York* back to the unadorned forum-shopping rationale of *Erie,* however, the Court falls prey to like over-simplification, for a simple forum-shopping rule also proves too much; litigants often choose a federal forum merely to obtain what they consider the advantages of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure or to try their cases before a supposedly more favorable judge. To my mind the proper line of approach in determining whether to apply a state or a federal rule, whether "substantive" or "procedural," is to stay close to basic principles by inquiring if the choice of rule would substantially affect those primary decisions respecting human conduct which our constitutional system leaves to state regulation. If so, *Erie* and the Constitution require that the state rule prevail, even in the face of a conflicting federal rule.
[ … ]
So long as a reasonable man could characterize any duly adopted federal rule as "procedural," the Court, unless I misapprehend what is said, would have it apply no matter how seriously it frustrated a State's substantive regulation of the primary conduct and affairs of its citizens. Since the members of the Advisory Committee, the Judicial Conference, and this Court who formulated the Federal Rules are presumably reasonable men, it follows that the integrity of the Federal Rules is absolute. Whereas the unadulterated outcome and forum-shopping tests may err too far toward honoring state rules, I submit that the Court's "arguably procedural, *ergo* constitutional" test moves too fast and far in the other direction.
The courts below relied upon this Court's decisions in *Ragan* v. *Merchants Transfer Co.,*[ … ] and *Cohen* v. *Beneficial Loan Corp.,*[ … ]. Those cases deserve more attention than this Court has given them, particularly *Ragan* which, if still good law, would in my opinion call for affirmance of the result reached by the Court of Appeals. Further, a discussion of these two cases will serve to illuminate the "diversity" thesis I am advocating.
In *Ragan* a Kansas statute of limitations provided that an action was deemed commenced when service was made on the defendant. Despite Federal Rule 3 which provides that an action commences with the filing of the complaint, [ … ] the Court held that for purposes of the Kansas statute of limitations a diversity tort action commenced only when service was made upon the defendant. The effect of this holding was that although the plaintiff had filed his federal complaint within the state period of limitations, his action was barred because the federal marshal did not serve a summons on the defendant until after the limitations period had run. I think that the decision was wrong. At most, application of the Federal Rule would have meant that potential Kansas tort defendants would have to defer for a few days the satisfaction of knowing that they had not been sued within the limitations period. The choice of the Federal Rule would have had no effect on the primary stages of private activity from which torts arise, and only the most minimal effect on behavior following the commission of the tort. In such circumstances the interest of the federal system in proceeding under its own rules should have prevailed.
*Cohen* v. *Beneficial Loan Corp.* held that a federal diversity court must apply a state statute requiring a small stockholder in a stockholder derivative suit to post a bond securing payment of defense costs as a condition to prosecuting an action. Such a statute is not "outcome determinative"; the plaintiff can win with or without it. The Court now rationalizes the case on the ground that the statute might affect the plaintiff's choice of forum[ … ], but as has been pointed out, a simple forum-shopping test proves too much. The proper view of *Cohen* is, in my opinion, that the statute was meant to inhibit small stockholders from instituting "strike suits," and thus it was designed and could be expected to have a substantial impact on private primary activity. Anyone who was at the trial bar during the period when *Cohen* arose can appreciate the strong state policy reflected in the statute. I think it wholly legitimate to view Federal Rule 23 as not purporting to deal[ … ]with the problem. But even had the Federal Rules purported to do so, and in so doing provided a substantially less effective deterrent to strike suits, I think the state rule should still have prevailed. That is where I believe the Court's view differs from mine; for the Court attributes such overriding force to the Federal Rules that it is hard to think of a case where a conflicting state rule would be allowed to operate, even though the state rule reflected policy considerations which, under *Erie,* would lie within the realm of state legislative authority.
It remains to apply what has been said to the present case. The Massachusetts rule provides that an executor need not answer suits unless in-hand service was made upon him or notice of the action was filed in the proper registry of probate within one year of his giving bond. The evident intent of this statute is to permit an executor to distribute the estate which he is administering without fear that further liabilities may be outstanding for which he could be held personally liable. If the Federal District Court in Massachusetts applies Rule 4 (d) (1) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure instead of the Massachusetts service rule, what effect would that have on the speed and assurance with which estates are distributed? As I see it, the effect would not be substantial. It would mean simply that an executor would have to check at his own house or the federal courthouse as well as the registry of probate before he could distribute the estate with impunity. As this does not seem enough to give rise to any real impingement on the vitality of the state policy which the Massachusetts rule is intended to serve, I concur in the judgment of the Court.
[ … ]

10.9

### Notes following Hanna


How do the Rules Enabling Act and Rules of Decision Act overlap? Upon which is *Hanna* based?
The Rules Enabling Act states that the Federal Rules cannot “abridge, enlarge, or modify an substantive right.” The word “substantive” lies at the core of cases interpreting the Rules of Decision Act. In *Hanna*, does Chief Justice Warren use the same definition of “substance” when interpreting both the Rules Enabling Act and the Rules of Decision Act?
*Hanna* relied on *Sibbach v. Wilson & Co.*, 312 U.S. 1 (1941), which states that the test to use for whether a Federal Rule “really regulates procedure – the judicial process for enforcing rights and duties recognized by substantive law and for justly administering remedy and redress for disregard or infraction thereof.” *Id*. at 14. Does this definition help outline the *Erie* doctrine?  Isn't it completely circular?
In *Hanna*, Chief Justice Warren argued that the *Erie* doctrine rests in part on it being unfair for a case to materially differ if it were brought in federal court rather than in state court, and in part to avoid forum-shopping. Does this parallel or abandon Justice Brandeis’s argument in *Erie* itself?
What does Justice Harlan mean by “primary” decisions of conduct? How does his test differ from the majority’s, and why?
In *Hanna*, Chief Justice Warren argued that in earlier cases, state rules applied because no on-point Federal Rule existed, but that in *Hanna*, a clash between a state and federal rule was “unavoidable.” How should a court determine whether a particular rule of law speaks to a particular situation? Should it look to the text of the purpose of the law in question?

10.10

### Walker v. Armco Steel Corp.


Supreme Court of the United States
446 U.S. 740, 64 L. Ed. 2d 659, 100 S. Ct. 1978, 1980 U.S. LEXIS 109, SCDB 1979-101
No. 78-1862
1980-06-02
446 U.S. 740 (1980)
[ … ]

#### MR. JUSTICE MARSHALL delivered the opinion of the Court.

This case presents the issue whether in a diversity action the federal court should follow state law or, alternatively, Rule 3 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure in determining when an action is commenced for the purpose of tolling the state statute of limitations.

#### I

[ … ]
Petitioner is a resident of Oklahoma, and respondent is a foreign corporation having its principal place of business in a [ … ] State other than Oklahoma. Since there was diversity of citizenship, petitioner brought suit in the United States District Court for the Western District of Oklahoma. The complaint was filed on August 19, 1977. Although summons was issued that same day, service of process was not made on respondent's authorized service agent until December 1, 1977.On January 5, 1978, respondent filed a motion to dismiss the complaint on the ground that the action was barred by the applicable Oklahoma statute of limitations. Although the complaint had been filed within the 2-year statute of limitations, Okla. Stat., Tit. 12, § 95 (1971), state law does not deem the action "commenced" for purposes of the statute of limitations until service of the summons on the defendant, [ … ] Okla. Stat., Tit. 12, § 97 (1971). If the complaint is filed within the limitations period, however, the action is deemed to have commenced from that date of filing if the plaintiff serves the defendant within 60 days, even though that service may occur outside the limitations period. [ … ] In this case, service was not effectuated until long after this 60-day period had expired. Petitioner in his reply brief to the motion to dismiss admitted that his case would be foreclosed in state court, but he argued that Rule 3 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure governs the manner in which an action is commenced in federal court for all purposes, including the tolling of the state statute of limitations.
[ … ]
[ … ]

#### III

The present case is indistinguishable from *Ragan.* The statutes in both cases require service of process to toll the statute of limitations, and in fact the predecessor to the Oklahoma statute in this case was derived from the predecessor to the Kansas statute in *Ragan.* [ … ]Here, as in *Ragan,* the complaint was filed in federal court under diversity jurisdiction within the 2-year statute of limitations, but service of process did not occur until after the 2-year period and the 60-day service period had run. In both cases the suit would concededly have been barred in the applicable state court, and in both instances the state service statute was held to be an integral part of the statute of limitations by the lower court more familiar than we with state law. Accordingly, as the Court of Appeals held below, [ … ] the instant action is barred by the statute of limitations unless *Ragan* is no longer good law.
Petitioner argues that the analysis and holding of *Ragan* did not survive our decision in *Hanna.* Petitioner's position is that Okla. Stat., Tit. 12, § 97 (1971), is in direct conflict with the Federal Rule. Under *Hanna,* petitioner contends, the appropriate question is whether Rule 3 is within the scope of the Rules Enabling Act and, if so, within the constitutional power of Congress. In petitioner's view, the Federal Rule is to be applied unless it violates one of those two restrictions. This argument ignores both the force of *stare decisis* and the specific limitations that we carefully placed on the *Hanna* analysis.
[ … ]
This Court in *Hanna* distinguished *Ragan* rather than overruled it, and for good reason. Application of the *Hanna* analysis is premised on a "direct collision" between the Federal Rule and the state law. [ … ] In *Hanna* itself the "clash" between Rule 4 (d) (1) and the state in-hand service requirement was "unavoidable."[ … ]The first question must therefore be whether the scope of the Federal Rule in fact is sufficiently broad to control the issue before [ … ] the Court. It is only if that question is answered affirmatively that the *Hanna* analysis applies.
[ … ]*
In contrast to Rule 3, the Oklahoma statute is a statement of a substantive decision by that State that actual service on, and accordingly actual notice by, the defendant is an integral part of the several policies served by the statute of limitations. [ … ]. The statute of limitations establishes a deadline after which the defendant may legitimately have peace of mind; it also recognizes that after a certain period of time it is unfair to require the defendant to attempt to piece together his defense to an old claim. A requirement of actual service promotes both of those functions of the statute. [ … ] It is these policy aspects which make the service[ … ] requirement an "integral" part of the statute of limitations both in this case and in *Ragan.* As such, the service rule must be considered part and parcel of the statute of limitations. Rule 3 does not replace such policy determinations found in state law. Rule 3 and Okla. Stat., Tit. 12, § 97 (1971), can exist side by side, therefore, each controlling its own intended sphere of coverage without conflict.
Since there is no direct conflict between the Federal Rule and the state law, the *Hanna* analysis does not apply.Instead, the policies behind *Erie* and *Ragan* control the issue whether, in the absence of a federal rule directly on point, state service requirements which are an integral part of the state statute of limitations should control in an action based on state law which is filed in federal court under diversity [753] jurisdiction. [ … ] There is simply no reason why, in the absence of a controlling federal rule, an action based on state law which concededly would be barred in the state courts by the state statute of limitations should proceed through litigation to judgment in federal court solely because of the fortuity that there is diversity of citizenship between the litigants. The policies underlying diversity jurisdiction do not support such a distinction between state and federal plaintiffs, and *Erie* and its progeny do not permit it.
The judgment of the Court of Appeals is
*Affirmed.*
[ … ]
 This is not to suggest that the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure are to be narrowly construed in order to avoid a "direct collision" with state law. The Federal Rules should be given their plain meaning. If a direct collision with state law arises from that plain meaning, then the analysis developed in *Hanna* v. *Plumer* applies.
[ … ]

10.11

### Notes following Walker


The Court in *Walker* could have found that Rule 3 did not toll the Oklahoma limitations period in two ways: by cabining Rule 3 to time requirements in other Federal Rules, and thus neither state nor federal limitations periods, or by merely cabining Rule 3 to federal limitations periods. Which do you prefer? Which did the Court choose? Review footnote 11 for some authorities on this subject.
How can you reconcile the Court’s interpretation of Rule 3 in *Walker* with its interpretation of Rule 4 in *Hanna*? One was read broadly and the other narrowly. Could it be because the underlying state laws were different in nature, one substantive the other procedural?  And isn't the Court lying through its teeth in footnote 9?
What happens when a discretionary option in a Federal Rule conflicts with a mandatory provision in a state rule? In *Burlington Northern R. Co. v. Woods*, 480 U.S. 1 (1987), the Supreme Court stated that the discretionary Federal Rule should reign: “the choice made by the drafters of the Federal Rules in favor of a discretionary procedure affects only the process of enforcing litigants’ rights and not the rights themselves.” *Id.*  at 8. Does this make sense with the other *Erie* cases we have read?

10.12

### Stewart Organization, Inc. v. Ricoh Corp.


Supreme Court of the United States
487 U.S. 22, 101 L. Ed. 2d 22, 108 S. Ct. 2239, SCDB 1987-125, 1988 U.S. LEXIS 2791
No. 86-1908
1988-06-20
487 U.S. 22 (1988)
[ … ]

#### [ … ] JUSTICE MARSHALL delivered the opinion of the Court.

This case presents the issue whether a federal court sitting in diversity should apply state or federal law in adjudicating a motion to transfer a case to a venue provided in a contractual forum-selection clause.

#### I

The dispute underlying this case grew out of a dealership agreement that obligated petitioner company, an Alabama corporation, to market copier products of respondent, a nationwide manufacturer with its principal place of business in New Jersey. The agreement contained a forum-selection clause providing that any dispute arising out of the contract could be brought only in a court located in Manhattan. Business relations between the parties soured under circumstances that are not relevant here. In September 1984, petitioner brought a complaint in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Alabama. [ … ]
Relying on the contractual forum-selection clause, respondent moved the District Court either to transfer the case to the Southern District of New York under one of the transfer statutes or to dismiss the case for improper venue under another of the transfer statutes. The District Court denied the motion. [ … ] It reasoned that the transfer motion was controlled by Alabama law and that Alabama looks unfavorably upon contractual forum-selection clauses. [ … ]
On appeal, a divided panel of the Eleventh Circuit reversed the District Court. The panel concluded that questions of venue in diversity actions are governed by federal law, and that the parties' forum-selection clause was enforceable as a matter of federal law.[ … ] The panel therefore reversed the order of the District Court and remanded with instructions to transfer the case to a Manhattan court. [ … ]

#### II

[ … ]Our cases indicate that when the federal law sought to be applied is a congressional statute, the first and chief question for the district court's determination is whether the statute is "sufficiently broad to control the issue before the Court." *Walker* v. *Armco Steel Corp.,* [ … ][ … ] This question involves a straightforward exercise in statutory interpretation to determine if the statute covers the point in dispute. [ … ]
If the district court determines that a federal statute covers the point in dispute, it proceeds to inquire whether the statute represents a valid exercise of Congress' authority under the Constitution. See *Hanna* v. *Plumer,* [ … ] (citing *Erie R. Co.* v. *Tompkins,** **)* If Congress intended to reach the issue before the district court, and if it enacted its intention into law in a manner that abides with the Constitution, that is the end of the matter; "[f]ederal courts are bound to apply rules enacted by Congress with respect to matters . . . over which it has legislative power." [ … ] Thus, a district court sitting in diversity must apply a federal statute that controls the issue before the court and that represents a valid exercise of Congress' constitutional powers.

#### [ … ] III

Applying the above analysis to this case persuades us that federal law, specifically one of the transfer statutes, governs the parties' venue dispute.

#### A

At the outset we underscore a methodological difference in our approach to the question from that taken by the Court of Appeals. The en banc court determined that federal law controlled the issue based on a survey of different statutes and judicial decisions that together revealed a significant federal interest in questions of venue in general, and in choice-of-forum clauses in particular. The Court of Appeals then proceeded to apply the standards announced in our opinion in *[a prior admiralty case articulating federal common law upholding forum selection clauses]* to determine that the forum-selection clause in this case was enforceable. But the immediate issue before the District Court was whether to grant respondent's motion to transfer the action underone of the transfer statutes, the immediate issue before the Court of Appeals was whether the District Court's denial of the [ … ]motion constituted an abuse of discretion. Although we agree with the Court of Appeals that the *federal common law upholding forum selection clauses*case may prove "instructive" in resolving the parties' dispute[ … ], we disagree with the [ … ] court's articulation of the relevant inquiry as "whether the forum selection clause in this case is unenforceable under the standards set forth in *prior SCOTUS opinions* Rather, the first question for consideration should have been whether one of the transfer statutes itself controls respondent's request to give effect to the parties' contractual choice of venue and transfer this case to a Manhattan court. For the reasons that follow, we hold that it does.

#### B

One of the transfer statutes provides: "For the convenience of parties and witnesses, in the interest of justice, a district court may transfer any civil action to any other district or division where it might have been brought." Under the analysis outlined above, we first consider whether this provision is sufficiently broad to control the issue before the court. That issue is whether to transfer the case to a court in Manhattan in accordance with the forum-selection clause. We believe that the statute, fairly construed, does cover the point in dispute.
The transfer statutes areintended to place discretion in the district court to adjudicate motions for transfer according to an "individualized, case-by-case consideration of convenience and fairness." *Van Dusen* v. *Barrack,* [ … ]. A motion to transfer under the transfer statutes thus calls on the district court to weigh in the balance the presumptions and law articulated in Atlantic Marine.*The [ … ] analysis Congress prescribed in the transfer statutes thus encompasses [ … ] consideration of the parties' private expression of their venue preferences.
In this case, the District Court will have either to integrate the factor of the forum-selection clause into its Atlantic Marine analysis as prescribed by Congress, or else to apply, as it did in this case, Alabama's categorical policy disfavoring forum-selection clauses. Our cases make clear that, as between these two choices in a single "field of operation," [ … ] the instructions of Congress are supreme. [ … ]
It is true that the transfer statutes and Alabama's putative policy regarding forum-selection clauses are not perfectly coextensive. [ … ] But this potential conflict in fact frames an additional argument for the supremacy of federal law. Congress has directed that the Atlantic Marine framework govern transfer within the federal court system, and a state policy focusing on a single concern or a subset of the factors identified in the transfer statutes would defeat that command. [ … ] The forum-selection clause, which represents the parties' agreement as to the most proper forum, should receive [ … ]the consideration for which Congress provided in the transfer statutes. [ … ]This is thus not a case in which state and federal rules "can exist side by side . . . each controlling its own intended sphere of coverage without conflict." *Walker* v. *Armco Steel Corp.*[ … ].
Because one of the transfer statutes controls the issue before the District Court, it must be applied if it represents a valid exercise of [ … ] Congress' authority under the Constitution. The constitutional authority of Congress to enact the transfer statutes is not subject to serious question. As the Court made plain in *Hanna,* "the constitutional provision for a federal court system . . . carries with it congressional power to make rules governing the practice and pleading in those courts, which in turn includes a power to regulate matters which, though falling within the uncertain area between substance and procedure, are rationally capable of classification as either." 380 U. S., at 472. [ … ] The transfer statutes are doubtless capable of classification as a procedural rule, and indeed, we have so classified it in holding that a transfer pursuant to one of the transfer statutes does not carry with it a change in the applicable law. [ … ] It therefore falls comfortably within Congress' powers under Article III as augmented by the Necessary and Proper Clause.[ … ]
We hold that federal law[ … ]governs the District Court's decision whether to give effect to the parties' forum-selection clause and transfer this case to a court in Manhattan.We therefore affirm the Eleventh Circuit order reversing the District Court's application of Alabama law. [ … ]
*It is so ordered.*

#### [ … ] JUSTICE KENNEDY, with whom JUSTICE O'CONNOR joins, concurring.**

I concur in full. I write separately only to observe that enforcement of valid forum-selection clauses, bargained for by the parties, protects their legitimate expectations and furthers vital interests of the justice system. Although our opinion in *The Bremen* v. *Zapata Off-Shore Co.*[ … ] involved a Federal District Court sitting in admiralty, its reasoning applies with much force to federal courts sitting in diversity. The justifications we noted in *The Bremen* to counter the historical disfavor forum-selection clauses had received in American courts, [ … ]should be understood to guide the District Court's analysis under the transfer statutes.
[ … ]Courts should announce and encourage rules that support private parties who negotiate forum selectionclauses. T[ … ]he authority and prerogative of the federal courts to determine the issue[ … ] should be exercised so that a valid forum-selection clause is given controlling weight in all but the most exceptional cases. [ … ]

#### ***

[ … ]
[ … ]
[ … ]
[ … ][ … ][ … ]
[ … ]
[ … ][ … ]
[ … ]
[ … ][ … ]
[ … ][ … ]
[ … ]

10.13

### Notes following Stewart


What test does *Stewart* articulate for determining if a federal statute is on point? Is this test different from the tests in the other *Erie* cases we have read, and how?
Think about forum selection clauses: why might they be incompatible with federal statutes, and why might states not want to honor them? Does your analysis change when the basis for jurisdiction is admiralty law  rather than diversity jurisdiction? What if there were arising under jurisdiction?
Recall the five *Erie* rationales. Does one predominate in the majority opinion in Stewart?

10.14

### Not a Study Guide Handouts


These two handouts are NOT meant as study guides. They are for humor value.

 (pdf)
 (pdf)

10.15

### Class 12 Oral Argument Video (8 min)


Watch  to learn how the oral argument for Class 12 will operate. It is 8 minutes long.

11
