1(a)

Diggle’s MTD would rest on Parkinson’s failure to follow R26(a)(1) of the MRCP by not attaching the expert’s testimony with her original complaint and thus failed to state a claim upon which relief could be granted. This poses an Erie problem. Under the York outcome-determinative test,  as always, we should follow state law because the progress of the suit depends on it.. Following   Hanna, we should follow the FRCP because it is both valid because of REA and directly applicable to this situation (unless construed narrowly.) Following Harlan’s concurrence, we should follow FRCP, because the FRCP probably would not affect primary behavior. Following Ginsburg in Shady Grove, we should follow state law and read the FRCP narrowly in light of the state interest in screening out applicants without a valid basis for a suit. Using Hanna, the ostensible test for Erie cases, we should not allow the MTD.

The most analogous case is Shady Grove because of its similar Erie problem. In Shady  a practice & class sue Allstate in NY fed. court for interest on claims paid late. Class-action criteria met under Fed. Rule 23, but NY state law prohibited classes that seek penalties. Scalia ostensibly found the Hanna test met but Ginsburg argued that we should construe the rules more narrowly depending on state interests. Similarly, here, the state could be interested in screening out cases that don’t already have expert testimony.

1(b)

This lends slightly more force to Ginsburg’s argument because of the explicit statement by the state proclaiming what their interest in making that rule is and that it was more than incidental . Arguably, however, creating a settling mechanism isn’t necessarily more substantive law. Considering the “twin aims of Erie,” it may encourage forum shopping and the inequitable distribution of justice, because the state court requirements  would filter out claims that could prevail (or at least continue) in Fed court. However, this may still be just a matter of process because ultimately expert testimony is required in Fed court and how and when the parties settle is not necessarily a matter of substance. York result would remain the same, Harlan could argue that it motivation to settle affects the primary behavior of medical practices, but it may not necessarily.   It is still valid under REA and applicable (Hanna) and moreover Scalia’s concern with consistency over federal procedure would probably still prevail.

1c)This lends more force to Ginsburg’s argument in its direct appeal to the state’s underlying policy. However, it is stated by the MA court, not its legislature and brings up the problems evident in Ginsburg original dissent of difficulties of intuiting intent, especially since it directly conflicts with the explanation in the rules themselves.  Harlan test is more likely to find state law since the rationale directly describes primary behavior (defensive medicine). However, it is still arguably valid under REA and applicable and moreover Scalia’s concern with consistency over federal procedure could probably still prevail.   This is more likely to support a MTD.

1(d)  In Shady,  Stevens agrees with Ginsburg’s analysis but believes that while you can bend federal rules,you shouldn’t break it. He insists however, that regardless of labels, if the statute is substantive, it is invalid. If his analysis includes interpretive analysis by the state court, he would be compelled to find this invalid.

1(e)

We should not reconcile our concept of procedure by attempting to intuit state intent. Civil procedure has several underlying goals that often conflict. Erie held that law is not discovered but created, a legal realist maneuver that has since approximated our estimation of the scope and significance of judge rulings. Since, we have ceded authority to the state legislatures and their judges in determining substantive issues of “the law of the several states” and the federalist rationale supports this. Arguably federalism allows for a more vigorous democracy by allowing each state to operate as a lab and serves its distinct constituency best. Ceding to state law otherwise procedural rules when we can intuit a policy-rationale supports this idea. However, it is difficult to reconcile a federal court system with wildly varying otherwise procedural rules with a United States that desires a nationally consistent federal court system. How much can a federal court adapt to state practices before it loses all distinction as a federal branch and cohesion with the other districts, serving simply as a secondary state system? The twin aims of Erie are prevent forum shopping and inequitable justice. While allowing procedural rules due to state motivations would prevent intrastate forum shopping and inequitable justice, it promotes interstate forum shopping and inequitable justice. We cannot support the very rationale for a federal court as a neutral, fair space in DJ if it cannot calibrate this neutrality by national consistency. Moroever, there is the  difficulty of intuiting legislative intent- IF there really is a unified intent and IF it is possible to intuit it. Even in this case where it is explicitly stated,  there is a difference of opinion. This leads me to conclude that considering fairness, consistency, and economy require that the law should not grant Diggle’s motion to dismiss and should rely on FRCP.

1(f)(1)

First, Diggle should claim a lack of PJ, stating that he did not purposely avail himself of the benefits of NH in that he never physically went there. This may not carry much weight as Parkinson could argue that he “reached into” NH when carrying out business over the internet (McGee), but if he doesn’t argue it now and continues litigation, he’ll never have the chance at all. The best argument would be claim preclusion, because the same claim was finally judged by the same parties. The issue would be whether a dismissal for not attaching the expert testimony qualifies as judgment on the merits (ONTM). The NH state court  would need apply the claim preclusion under §1738 to determine whether dismissal has a preclusive effect.  NH court would essentially engage in a COL analysis. Federal common law governs the claim-preclusive effect of a dismissal by a federal court sitting in diversity, which in turn will apply the claim-preclusion laws of the state in which the federal court is located and would attempt MA preclusive law (Semtek).

If a MA would preclude a similar suit, the NH state court should dismiss. If not, it won’t. We would need to know MA preclusion policies for certain, but might hinge on the statutory note or the MA supreme court’s opinion alternately. If relying on the statutory note, it may decide it’s not ONTM because it might discourage settlement. If relying on the opinion, it may decide it is ONTM to discourage defensive medicine more generally.

1(f)(2)

This brings up the same problems visited in 1(e): to what extent should a court defer to state sovereignty at the expense of clarity, consistency, and, possibly common sense. The NH fed ct. applying a NH or MA COL analysis for preclusion without necessarily the same substantive law might create a Frankenstein procedure that no legislature would vote for, similar to the problems with the 2nd restatement HCOL analysis. If we only valued certainty, consistency, and administrative economy, we should make a uniform federal rule (presumably considered in Semtek), but Erie again rears its ugly head in its concern for state sovereignty and its twins aims of preventing forum shopping and inequitable justice.

While the primary difficulty, beyond balancing state sovereignty with interests of national consistency, with 1(e) was the difficulty intuiting state intent, this creates the more disturbing problem of intuiting preclusive intent AND attaching it to an independently created substantive law.. This power to create ad hoc laws as the case demands cedes too much power to unelected judges with undetermined interests and policies weighing in the balance. Attempting to sit in the place of another state’s court is a fruitless exercise, because ultimately one cannot determine with any certainty how they or their legislator would weigh all interests and distributing this incompetency among all state courts does not balance out the harm, but only leads to confusion and inequity.

1(g)(1)

This probably would not affect the outcome of the NH’s decision, since they are looking more formulaically at that MA’s court approach to preclusion in general and not in this instance, even if the original problem that led to dismissal has been rectified.

1(g)(2)

As a matter of fairness , it seems that the case should be allowed to continue. While preclusion in 1(f)(2) puts federalism in contrast with efficiency and fairness, this scenario emphasizes the issue of fairness more generally. While a MA court would have the discretion to determine its own preclusive effect depending on the circumstances, a NH court is bound to apply MA preclusive effect more as a minimum

Declaratory Judgment

Imaginary lawsuit

LupinBank could bring a suit for a declaratory judgment to determine whether it has been negligent per se toward Clearwater. In the Imaginary Lawsuit that this case would be meant to preempt, Clearwater would argue that Lupinbank’s failed hyperlink breached its duty toward her, as a member of the protected class meant to be insulated from predatory creditors, by failing to disclose the percentage of consumers who defaulted and that this caused her to rack up exorbitant debt due to their extremely high interest rates. Lupinbank could bring this case in…

NY Federal

SMJ can be established here through DJ or FQJ. DJ because Clearwater is potentially domiciled in NJ, as she is a college student and NJ may be the last place she lived where she remained to stay indefinitely (If however, a court found that there she intended to stay/work in NY, it could destroy DJ). LupinBank is domiciled in NY(headquarters) and DE (incorporated), maintain complete diversity (Strawbridge). FQJ because although there is no federal cause of action (Holmes), in the Imaginary Lawsuit (IL) the CFPB federal regulations would be a necessary to find negligence for Clearwater. (Smith-Grable). A NY court also has PJ over Clearwater as she purposefully availed herself of the protections of the state living and studying within the city. In the alternate, IL in which LupinBank is the defendant, the court has general jurisdiction over it. Venue is lain because §1391(b)(2), NY is where the site is maintained and where Clearwater was unable to access the default rate.

NJ Federal

SMJ can be established through DJ and FQJ just as in NY Federal. For the purposes of SMJ, it is irrelevant that LupinBank maintains a large facility in NJ, as domiciliary is established through the states of incorporation and principal place of business. There is general PJ over Clearwater because she is a domiciliary of NJ. There is possibly PJ over LupinBank because it maintains a large enough facility that it could find the contacts “substantial and continuous,” but it may not be necessary as they are the plaintiff in this suit, and, moreover, they could waive PJ. Venue is lain because §1391(b)(1.) Clearwater resides (which has been interpreted as domiciled) in NJ.

DE Federal

Were Clearwater the plaintiff (or considerd the plaintiff for the purposes of finding the proper court according to the IL), DE might be appropriate. It has SMJ like NY and NJ. There might not be general PJ over LupinBank, although incorporated there, there is no “substantial and continuous” contacts nor is the specific PJ relevant here, but LupinBank could wave this is desired (DE is probably favorable to business litigation). Similarly,  venue could be waived. This would be an ideal location for LupinBank, but the court would not consider them defendants even though they would be in the IL, since they’re preempting Clearwater’s choice of forum. Clearwater could sue LupinBank here should they waive PJ and Venue, but they would have difficulty suing her here.

NY State

NY court would have PJ and venue as described in the federal court. It would not require SMJ.

NJ State

It also does not require SMJ. It would have Pj and venue as described of the federal court.

DE State

As described above, there would be no basis for PJ over Clearwater nor venue.

NY Federal court would be the best place to initiate a suit for PJ reasons. Even if Clearwater is found to be a domiciliary of NY, thus destroying that basis for PJ, Clearwater’s purposeful availment of the benefits and laws of the city are a good basis for PJ and might even subject her to the general jurisdiction of NY if the contacts are found substantial and continuous enough. Similarly, venue is lain here both because the events happened here and, possibly, she is a domiciliary of NY for venue purposes.  This would be better than NY state court because, as LupinBank appreciates, federal courts are “pro-big-bank.” If Clearwater is found to be a domiciliary of NY, destroying diversity, and the FQJ proves too elusive, NY state court would be the next best alternative.

LupinBank would also have the benefit of NY using its own substantive law .Should she go to another state, they would need to do a HCOL. If 1st restatement, they would simply, as NY does, use lexloci delicti and use the law where the tort was vested. However, if another court uses a 2nd restatement COL and finds that other states (NJ, DE) have a significant interest, it could result in piecemeal litigation unfavorable to one or both parties due to its hodgepodge nature.

2(b)

Lack of SMJ would not bar Clearwater from bringing the same suit against Lupinbank (Marrese), but it would prevent her from litigating the same issue of federal subject matter. The issue would be precluded because it is the same issue on which the court denied her jurisdiction, it was actually litigated even through the appellate court, and it was necessary to the decision to dismiss her claim in federal court- her lack of diversity alone wouldn’t prevent SMJ, but must also entail a denial of FQJ jurisdiction under Smith-Grables..

This would benefit LupinBank in two ways. First, it would limit the courts in which Clearwater could bring suit against them. She can no longer bring suit in federal court and if she litigated in a state court, its rulings would be limited to that jurisdiction for precedential purposes. More to the point, since her FQJ failed to establish SMJ, the particular issue of whether this CPRB is a substantial federal issue of her case may, depending on how broadly the court defines the issue, estop her from using the CPRB as a basis for her negligence per se suit in the future. While a state court has jurisdiction to litigate federal issues, the issue preclusion may prevent her from using the claim of the violation of federal regulation in her subsequent case. Potentially, it could also have the effect of nonmutual defensive collateral estopped, giving them an enormous advantage over (the inevitable) future litigation for their predatory credit cards.

3)

FOR: SCOTUS should interpret summary judgment and JAMOL more permissively.By implementing the Twiqbal code pleading standard in  contrast to the ostensibly “short and plain” requirement  of FRCP8, SCOTUS has essentially moved the screening process from summary judgment  to motion to dismiss. By controlling for judicial economy on the outset and preventing frivolous or unwarranted claims, the judicial system can spend more resources ascertaining the validity of those claims, serving the interest of judicial economy by properly investigating the claims (more permissive SJ) and allowing more thorough and liberal deliberation by a separate party (JAMOL) allowing for more conclusive finality. Moreover, we can balance the substantial gatekeeping power given to a trial judge with Twiqbal  by allowing the jury a more substantial role in the actual decision making process both in which cases they hear and how their verdict is respected. In this way, accommodating for Twiqbal will  balance the discretion of the judge with the input from the community and allow for a more robust, comprehensive, and fair access to justice.

AGAINST: SCOTUS should not interpret summary judgment and JAMOL more liberally. By the code pleading standard articulated in Twiqbal, the court has proclaimed an interest in judicial economy and a resistance to unwarranted claims that resists an expansion of judicial resources on cases that do not meet the standard. Trials, like discovery, are also incredibly expensive, but not just for large corporations but for the jurors who sacrifice their time to be in court. If we are loathe to impose the costs on defendants, we should be even more loathe to impose it on citizens.On the other hand, allowing more cases to go to trial and JAMOL may give the illusion of a thorough process of justice, while not fixing the essential injustice of Twiqbal, which shields institutions that are “too big for discovery” but instead compensating by condescendingly allowing juries to rule no cases that have already been vetted for them.  It would instead allow plaintiffs privy to the workings of those defendants (or with the lawyers and resources to find them out)to continue litigation almost indefinitely. In essence, it would promote businesses suing each other (cases for which the jury is generally least suited), but prevent individuals from suing big business in certain cases.

I find the latter more persuasive. I don’t think the benefits in terms of fairness and thorough deliberation that a more permissive standard would provide address the particular concerns about justice and economy that Twiqbal present. Instead, they destroy the “savings” in judicial economy and artificially makes it seem like the jury is in charge. At the SJ phase,  thejudge’s input is more valuable as the case can finally be estimated with all the evidence and so a more permissive standard seems inappropriate, especially considering the expense of a trial. However, R50 seems more appropriate in allowing the jury the last word in the proceedings with no extra cost, more appropriately balancing the discretion of the judge.
