## Question 1

       The writer is correct to conclude that there is a real conflict between the principles

of procedural due process and simplicity in the American legal system. She could just as

easily have used the terms we used most often this semester to describe these principles:

fairness and efficiency. Examples of this conflict include measures like preclusion that
increase efficiency but potentially reduce litigants’ ability to defend themselves, or

doctrines like Erie that go to extreme lengths to ensure that litigants are safe from “home

cooking” prejudice at the price of relatively inefficient and complicated litigation.

       But the evolution the writer traces isn’t quite the black-and-white duality she

implies. Justice Breyer’s opinion in Turner isn’t so much a 180-degree departure from the

court’s previous jurisprudence that attempted to expand procedural due process

safeguards as it is a left turn--a recognition that it’s time to try something new, and in so

doing, strike a balance between these two principles that have been at war since the birth

of American jurisprudence.

       The U.S. Supreme Court (SCOTUS) has long recognized this conflict, and their

solutions have indeed complicated legal processes. In Sniadach, among the first of the

Court’s focus on PDP that began in the late-60s and early-70s, the Court required that

Wisconsin provide sufficient notice and opportunity to be heard to a debtor whose wages

were garnished. One year later, in Goldberg the Court required that New York City and

State provide a hearing before depriving a beneficiary of government assistance of her

benefits. In Vitek v. Jones in 1980 the court outlined a host of irreducible minimums of

PDP including adequate notice, an in-person hearing, an opportunity to present and

confront witnesses, and even a legal counselor (who may or may not be a lawyer).

       Not long after, SCOTUS reached the verge the verge of mandating civil counsel in

Lassiter, but refrained, and has since moderated--2011’s Turner v. Rogers was unable to

garner a single vote for civil counsel. They’ve probably come to the conclusion that the
writer has yet to: while lawyers at state expense could very well be necessary (though

probably not sufficient, as the writer claims), it would be shortsighted to mandate that

states incur this expense and the inevitable inefficient slowdown of the legal system that

such a measure would entail without attempting alternate reforms first.

       Justice Breyer outlined some of these reforms in his Turner opinion, noting that

“they lack the drawbacks inherent in recognizing an automatic right to counsel.” These

include enhanced notice, use of simple forms, a simplified hearing process, and making

express findings about D’s ability to pay. These suggestions echo calls for reform from

legal commentators like Bibas and Barton who argue that “the task now...is to make civil

lawsuits simpler and more accessible to nonlawyers.” In other words, pro se reform.

       Organizations like the AJS, the NCCS, and other academics are seeking to take

Breyer’s suggestions even further. While these developments may frustrate advocates of

a right to civil counsel like Pollock and Greco, even Breyer appears to agree with one of

Bibas/Barton’s major conclusions: “It is far more important to fund appointed lawyers in

serious felony cases than it is to provide them in, say, housing court.” Until now, the

Court has focused on adequate PDP for those from whom property or liberty would be

taken by the government. The writer’s proposal optimistically and ambitiously exceeds

these measures, but unfortunately fails to meet the most important standard in a

complicated, ossified, difficult-to-navigate legal system: practicability.

-------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------

## Question 2_

       (a) The 2nd Circuit (2COA) should hear Fillius, Inc.’s (FI) FRCP 50 JAMOL
appeal, but should not hear the director and officers’ (D&Os) appeal regarding Judge

Jorkins’ (JJ) granting of a new trial. The 2nd Circuit has appellate jurisdiction over the

JAMOL appeal because SDNY had FQJ (embedded question of federal law re: “mail

delivery”) & DJ (complete diversity, Strawbridge + AIC > 75k) and the JAMOL appeal

is a final order. It will review JJ’s decision de novo. 2COA should not review JJ’s grant

of a FRCP59 motion for new trial, because the grant or refusal of a new trial is a matter

within the discretion of the trial judge and is not reviewable on appeal except in

exceptional circumstances, such as a clear abuse of discretion. (Yeatts). No such abuse of

discretion is present here. While 2COA could not have review the MSJ order regarding

the definition of “mail delivery” at the time of the order, it could now, and D&Os should

have appealed on this basis as well. Now they’re precluded.

       (b) While there is some doubt regarding JJ’s finding on the definition of “mail

delivery,” her post-trial rulings appears to be correct.

       JAMOL: The evidence does appear to suggest that the D&Os knew about the high

collision rate and were therefore reckless in not seeking an FAA license. That said, it’s

not impossible that a rational jury could decide the way they did. Perhaps the emails

appeared forged. Thus, a rational jury could have decided the way they did, and JJ’s

ruling is appropriate.

       New Trial: However, even if a rational jury could have found as this jury did, a

judge may give a new trial on the grounds that the verdict is “against the clear weight of

the evidence.” (Yeatts). The problem here is that JJ appears to suggest that her MSJ re:

“mail delivery” definition will be reviewed in the new trial. It won’t, because she just

granted FI’s motion for a new trial on the issue of D&Os’ knowledge of the high accident
rate, not the MSJ.

-------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------

## Question 3_

       D&Os can use claim preclusion to defend against SS’s suit. NY state court will
give at least as much preclusive effect, maybe even more, than the subsequent federal

court. (Hart).

       Claim Preclusion:

       Same claim: While SS brings here a tort claim rather than the shareholder’s

derivative claim she brought in the last suit, the claim is based in the same T/O. Same

evidence, same facts, etc.

       Same parties: Gonzales and our in-class “Joey Rich/JR, Inc.” hypothetical suggest

that SS is in privity with FI, and the parties are therefore the same.

       FJOM: The final judgment was on the merits (SS won).

       Claim preclusion is probably dispositive, but if SS can prove somehow that she is

not in privity, SS could issue preclude the D&Os in NY state court on the issue of 1) their

knowledge of the high collision rate; and perhaps on 2) the definition of “mail delivery,”

which is crucial to the determination of negligence or recklessness.

       To get past claim preclusion, SS would have had to prove she was not in privity

with FI. This lack of privity would hurt her in many courts, which require strict mutuality

for issue preclusion/collateral estoppel (CE). NY state courts, however, have no mutuality

requirement for CE.

       Knowledge:

       Same Issue: Yes. The fact of knowledge.

       Same Parties: Not necessary in NY, see above (mutuality).
       Actually litigated: Yes, evidence was raised by FI (emails), denied by D&Os

(testimony). This was a crucial question in the previous case, and both parties were

highly motivated to litigate it.

       Necessary to the decision: Yes. This finding made the difference between

negligence and recklessness, the key issue in the second trial.

       “Mail Delivery” Definition: While JJ believed this to be a matter of fact, the NY

state court may not see it that way, and it may be necessary to SS to argue this “issue” as

a matter of fact.

       Same issue: Yes. The definition of the term, which at least one commentator

believes is a mixed question of law and fact.
       Same parties: As above, not necessary in NY.

       Actually litigated: Yes, the issued was raised (both parties filed cross motions on

the matter) and determined (JJ granted MSJ).

       Necessary to the decision: Yes. It was appealable, and the jury could not have

reached a determination on negligence or recklessness without it.

-------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------

## Question 4_

       First, HCOL:
       EDVA will probably apply VA procedural law (Klaxon). What substantive law

will EDVA DCt apply? VA is a 2nd restatement state, so EDVA will weigh the relevant

states’ interests and the transaction’s “center of gravity,” or where most of the facts are.

Because the facts regarding the collision with TT’s drone are mostly in VA (some in

WV) and VA has an interest in governing conduct that occurs in its territory, EDVA will

probably apply VA law to the tort claim. It could have applied WV law (and perhaps seen

a significantly different outcome on the tort claim), but the fact that collision occurred

just over the border is insufficient to negate VA’s interests in governing conduct that

occurs in its territory (drone flights by its citizens and companies that do business within

its borders). EDVA will probably apply NY law to the shareholder’s derivative claim

because the company is publicly traded in New York, and NY has a similar interest in
governing the conduct of the companies that trade therein, particularly when that conduct

has a significant effect on their stock price. This is not the ideal outcome for CC, as VA’s

standards for punitive damages are plaintiff-friendly.

       (a) There are several grounds upon which our clients can move to dismiss under

Rule 12(b).

       SMJ isn’t one of them. There appears to be FQL because there in an embedded

question of federal law (definition of “mail delivery”). (Smith-Grable exception). If there

weren’t FQJ, there would still be DJ because complete diversity (VA v. NJ) and AIC >

75k.

       Personal jurisdiction is a grounds for dismissal as per Rule 12(b)(2). EDVA
piggybacks off CA’s long-arm statute via FRCP 4(k)(1)(a). It’s improbable that VA has

personal jurisdiction over the defendants. First, there’s a question as to whether the

concept of privity extends to personal jurisdiction. D&Os are in charge of the company,

but the company is publicly traded. I’ll proceed as though privity has no bearing on IPJ

questions regarding a company’s D&Os. D&Os here have insufficient minimal contacts

with the D, the forum (VA) and the subject matter (Intl. Shoe). The D&Os haven’t

personally purposefully availed themselves of VA law, they didn’t personally direct the

harm into the forum, and they couldn’t have expected to be haled into VA for the actions

of a company of which they are simply D&Os. That said, VA’s interest in providing

effective means of redress for its citizens is strong here, and the ease of getting

information and witnesses may be easier in VA than in NY.

       Venue is another ground for dismissal under §1391(b), as per Rule 12(b)(2),

because (1) defendants don’t reside in EDVA; (2) the events occurred in WDVA and

WV; (3) the action may be brought properly in other districts (WDVA, DNJ).

       Finally, while we could argue that TT has failed to state a claim, it’s likely that this

argument will be unsuccessful. TT must meet the pleading standard, but there’s a conflict

here: SCOVA says pleading standard is notice, SCOTUS says standard is

Twombley/Iqbal. VCOL problem. While it appears that TT has pled sufficiently to meet

both standards (the complaint appears to have successfully crossed the line from possible

to plausible even after crossing out legal conclusions), I’ll perform VCOL analysis here:

       York: Not outcome determinative, so use federal rule: Twiqbal.

       Hanna Majority: The SCOTUS rule is applicable (on point) and appears to be valid.
SCOTUS is interpreting a FRCP 8(a), and in so doing is probably acting appropriately

under REA, though it could be argued that the standard “abridges” a VA citizen’s

substantive right in other cases. Scalia would say it’s an easy call: SCOTUS’

interpretation of FRCP 8(a) is on point, so there’s no need to look at state law. Use

Twiqbal.

       Harlan Concurrence: No problems here. While CC is a big company, it appears

unlikely to modify its primary conduct to take advantage of the state rule. May use

Twiqbal.

       Ginsburg (Shady Grove/Walker): VA’s state law here appears “powerful” in that

it’s a marked departure from FRCP with serious consequences for litigants, and Ginsburg

would try hard to construe the federal rule narrowly. She would probably struggle to do
so however, as the rules are in direct conflict. Perhaps she would construe the federal rule

narrowly in just this case, and in so doing revive the post-Twombley perception that

plausibility pleading only applies to certain types of cases.

       (b) This claim will be much tougher to dismiss.

       As above, FQJ is present under Smith-Grable because embedded federal question

of “mail delivery.” If no FQJ, TT cannot bring the claim against CC because it doesn’t

satisfy AIC requirement for DJ.

       General IPJ. CC is “essentially at home” in VA because its VA operations are

sufficiently continuous and systematic (like Wal-Mart).

       Venue, proper under §1391(b)(1).

       It’s unlikely that the claim will be dismissed for failure to state a claim (FRCP

12(b)(6)). Because TT has pled adequately under both standards, the VCOL analysis is

the same as above.

       (d) Because the tort claim against the D&Os will probably be dismissed, this won’t

be necessary. If, however, that claim is not dismissed, we’ll argue that the parties were

joined improperly under FRCP 20(a)(2). While there is a common issue of fact (drone

flights conducted negligently), we have a strong argument that the claims are based on

different T/Os, and should be tried separately.

       (addtl.) Issue preclusion (on the same issues as in SS’s preclusion argument) may

play a role here. Though the parties are different and VA requires full mutuality,

interstate preclusion rules require that a subsequent state court give as much preclusive

effect to a rendering federal court’s judgment as a state court in the state in which the

rendering federal court sat would. The rendering court is in NY, and NY has no mutuality

requirement. EDVA DCt should apply NY state preclusion law and require no mutuality.
