## Question 1

       There may be an inherent conflict between simplified procedures and greater

protections. State agencies, such as the offices that award drivers’ licenses, often play an

adjudicatory role; they use simplified procedures to make decisions which may have

radically negative impacts on citizens. Often, there’s no opportunity to contest such

decisions, or opaque bureaucratic systems obscure the opportunities for pro se litigants to

protect their rights. When an adjudicatory system is challenged on procedural due process

grounds and additional protection is proposed, the courts often employ Matthew/Eldridge

balancing to determine whether to add the procedure. This balancing test always

measures the government’s interests in reducing costs against the interests of the party

concerned and the risk of erroneously depriving that party of liberty or property. Such a

test demonstrates that the government’s interest in efficiency often conflicts with private

party’s interests in increased due process. However, the governmental interest in cheaper

adjudicatory processes is in some cases aligned with the interest of indigent plaintiffs. In

child custody suits as in Turner, the simplified process may have served the interests of

the mother trying to recover child support payments - she may not have been able to

navigate a more complex process. If one proposes lawyers as the solution, then lawyers

must be provided both for defendants and for plaintiffs.

       But should lawyers be guaranteed; must there be a Gideon for civil actions - was

SCOTUS wrong in rejecting the right to counsel in Turner? If legal representation is

required for all adjudications, then the systems of justice would be swamped; imagine the

DMV offices standing still. The justice system would probably respond by simplifying

methods of ending cases early, which would result in an increase in the mistaken

dismissal of meritorious claims (much like what happened as a result of the heightened,

plausibility pleading standard). However, perhaps efficiency and judicial economy would

readjust naturally, as the agency systems would be forced to reform their adjudication

methods in response to the overwhelming flood. Regarding fairness, more lawyers would

provide greater protection for defendants - the mother in Lassiter certainly would have

benefited from the assistance of a lawyer. However, as previously mentioned, in cases

like child custody claims, lawyers would need to be provided to both sides. SCOTUS in

Turner indicated that doing so would create more complications, leading to more

complex processes, thus counteracting the potential for lawyers to simplify procedures

and running counter to the commentator’s dichotomous representation of protection

versus simplification. Additionally, some argue lawyers don’t lead to fairer outcomes for

the parties involved; in their article, Barton & Bibas claim there’s no difference in

outcomes when lawyers are provided. They point to Gideon’s legacy: overworked public

defenders, unable to adequately represent clients, and a criminal system that’s adjusted to

the pressure by becoming wholly dependent on plea bargaining. A similar, detrimental

outcome might occur on the civil side. Then again, more lawyers may lead to a move

away from agencies that employ simplified processes and towards the formalized court

system that generally provides more protection than agencies. Originalists may be

proponents of such a shift, but the competitive advantage of agencies and their ability to

quickly and competently deal with matters would disappear.

       While I would argue that requiring lawyers would flood the civil system and thus

force radical change and a recognition of the unconscionable and possibly

unconstitutional lack of due process in agency decisions that deny liberty and new

property interests, I’m forced to admit that lawyers do not necessarily simplify processes

and arguably do not provide more protection and just outcomes. As Pollock & Greco

argue, counsel should be provided when “basic human needs” or physical liberty are at

stake, but in other cases, certain protections may not require more complex systems and

greater state expenditures. Vitek recommends written notice. Currently, many defendants

don’t actually receive notice. Email and text message notification may be cheaper and

more effective. The Restatement of Judgments (2nd) recommends that issues be

formulated in reference to specific rules. Creating basic forms and tools for litigants

would systematically make adjudications simpler, clearer, and more consistent (while

forms are provided, they aren’t necessarily aligned with common law requirements - see

plausibility pleading). Other protections may require initial investments but could be

drawn out of a rotating fund; in order to protect against erroneous deprivation, the

government could post bonds on behalf of plaintiffs. Plaintiffs would then have an

opportunity to contest before the property is actually seized, and the government would

be protected by its own bond system. Lastly, lawyers could relinquish their monopoly on

the justice system; specialized counsel may be more efficient and effective in providing

greater civil protections in certain cases.

-------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------

## Question 2_

       The appellate court has DJ but probably not SMJ through FQJ Smith/Grable

exception; the federal government has an interest in uniform interpretations of the Mail-

Only Act (MOA), but exercising FQJ would sweep many drone cases into the federal

courts and defining “mail” is a fact-bound issue. The court has DJ because Fillius is suing

on behalf of CC against SFU. There is complete diversity between CC (nerve center in

NY and incorporated in DE) and SFU (domiciled in NJ), and the AIC is 300K or $3.3

million. If CC is considered the defendant, there is diversity: Fillius is incorporated and

PPoB in Maine. There is general IPJ over SFU through Daimler (may as well be at home

in NY) with the long-arm statute or specific IPJ (R4k1(a) piggybacks on NJ long-arm

statute), as SFU have minimal contacts and it would be fair and reasonable to try the case

in NY. Venue properly laid: 1391(B)(2).

       There is no appellate jurisdiction under 1291 because there was no final order, and

no jurisdiction under rule 54(b), as there’s no final judgment for any individual claim. No

final order with respect to the issue, so no interlocutory appeal under Cohen. Possible

jurisdiction under 1292(b) as the trial court wrote there’s an issue for which there could

be substantial difference of opinion and a district court decision could materially advance

the ultimate termination of the litigation. However, the issue may be too fact-bound for

an appellate court and so the appellate court should not exercise jurisdiction under

1291(b) - the trial court’s familiar with all information from discovery regarding the

failure to seek a permit. No 1292(a)(1) jurisdiction because there’s no injunction and no

writ of mandamus because the plaintiff won’t suffer any irreparable harm and no need

for a supervisory writ.

       JJ was technically correct in denying the JAMOL motion. Although SFU had a full

opportunity to be heard, because the initial JAMOL (before the jury verdict) was denied,

there’s no delayed JAMOL to be renewed for a JNOV. If the appellate court reviews the

motion for JAMOL, it will be de novo, and the court could find that the first JAMOL

motion should have been granted, as the evidence clearly appeared to show SFU knew of

the drone collisions. JJ was right to grant a new trial motion, as Fillius convinced JJ he

made a mistake, and the summary judgment ruling in favor of CC was not harmless error.

The granting of the new trial motion is not reviewable on appeal without exceptional

circumstances.

-------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------

Answer-to-Question-__3_

       NY state court has venue because 1391(B)(2). SFU should file for dismissal on the

theory of claim preclusion. SS is suing SFU over the same issue that Fillius (or CC, if

they were the plaintiff) did: outrageous conduct regarding knowledge of the accident rate.

It’s the same transaction or occurrence and would use the same evidence as the

stockholder’s derivative suit. There’s privity, as SS had a significant degree of effective

control of the first lawsuit; she made all decisions on behalf of Fillius. If CC were the

plaintiff in the first case, then there’s strictly no privity here, but SS’s control of the first

lawsuit probably trumps the legal fiction of corporation as plaintiff in stockholder

derivative suits. There was final judgment on the merits in the federal court; the lawsuit is

over and wasn’t dismissed for procedural reasons but was decided by a jury and affirmed

on appeal.

       SS will try to issue preclude (NMOCE or OCE) my client on a factual matter. The

issue is the same as before; whether SFU knew of the accidents and acted outrageously in

ignoring it. In NY state court, mutuality is not required for issue preclusion, so questions

of who was the first plaintiff are irrelevant; federal preclusion law would forbid NMOCE

(Erie issue?). This issue was actually litigated, given that the precise question was raised

and the jury determined an award (SFU had every reason to defend themselves

vigorously in suit 1). Given that punitive damages were awarded in the first lawsuit by

the jury, after they determined that SFU knew of the accident rate, the finding regarding

the outrageousness of SFU’s failure to obtain a license was necessary to the final decision

(so no Rios/ gratuitous to decision). However, a court may decide that collateral estoppel

should not be permitted here because SS had full opportunity to have her interests heard

in court during lawsuit 1.

       Semtek: since the first court was a federal court with DJ, the subsequent, NY state

court is to use the law of the state in which the first court sat, and give as much preclusive

effect as that state would to the judgment. Since the first court was in NY, the state court

will follow issue preclusion rules of New York, which do not require mutuality (Hart). If,

however, the first federal court had FQJ under Smith/Grable exception, and the state

court finds the parties in lawsuit 2 are not in privity, then the state may follow federal

common law and forbid NMCE because of 1738 and the rendering court would have

precluded the case.

-------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------

Answer-to-Question-__4_

       If TT is the plaintiff for both claims, then SFU could move to dismiss count 1

against them for lack of independent SMJ and no supplemental jurisdiction (following

Exxon). SFU can argue venue wasn’t properly laid in the Eastern District of Virginia, as

defendants don’t reside there, the events or omissions that gave rise to the claim didn’t

occur there, and there are other districts in which the case could’ve been brought. There

was no general nor specific IPJ because SFU don’t live in Virginia nor significantly

benefit from VA; so SFU can contest IPJ through special appearance.

       If CC is the plaintiff for claim 1, then SFU could move to claim preclude the suit.

There’s the same claim regarding liability for decreased stock prices. CC and SFU are the

same parties, and there was final judgment on the merits in the NY case already. Virginia

requires more stringent preclusion standards than NY, and require full mutuality, but

these requirements are met.

       Count II against CC could be dismissed for lack of IPJ or failure to properly lay

venue. There’s DJ because the AIC is at least 200K, CC is in NY & DE, and TT lives in

Virginia. Specific jurisdiction requires minimal contacts between the defendant, forum

and subject matter (although McGee suggests plaintiff’s interests are relevant too). The

federal long arm statute piggybacks on Virginia’s long arm statute. CC purposefully

availed itself of the benefits of Virginia, but it still may not be fair and reasonable to try

the case there - it’d be much better to try the case in West Virginia, where the brunt of the

harm was felt. Venue was improper as well because CC isn’t in Virginia, the

events/omissions occurred in West Virginia, and the case could have been brought

somewhere else.

       CC can move to dismiss the punitive damage claim (FRCP 12). Virginia, as the

forum state, will follow notice pleading since it’s purely procedural, so there’s no HCOL

analysis and the complaint sufficiently notified CC of the transaction/occurrence giving

rise to the claim. Virginia is a 2nd restatement state, so the court will conduct HCOL

analysis for the issue of whether recklessness is necessary for awarding punitive damages

(Klaxon: federal court in diversity uses rules of state in which its sitting). If it’s

procedural, then punitive damages will be rewarded, but if it’s substantive, then look to

the center of gravity. The collision occurred in WV, Longbottom’s office and alleged

negligence occurred in WV, and so the court will use WV law and forbid punitive

damages for negligence. TT cannot use NMOCE for the negligence issue in Virginia

because Virginia requires full mutuality.

       CC could alternatively move to transfer the case to WV. Since the first court was

not a happy court (either for lack of PJ or improperly laid venue), the transferee court will

use its own COL rules. WV is a first restatement state and the crash occurred in WV, so

TT won’t be able to get punitive damages from CC. WV follows the plausibility pleading

standard, so all conclusory statements in the complaint regarding CC’s negligence are

ignored. TT will not be able to use NMOCE on the negligence issue in his case because

the issue being decided is not the same as the issue in NY court - in NY it was over the

failure to get a license and here it’s vicarious liability for Longbottom’s negligence.

       FRCP 42 allows for the court to separate the trials for efficiency reasons. Since the

alleged misfeasance is different for each claim, the court will probably separate. If TT is

the plaintiff for both claims, there’s no permissive joinder for CC as the defendant in

claim 2 because there are different transaction or occurrences at issue. However, if SFU

are considered 3rd party defendants in claim 2 because liability shifts to them, then T/O is

not required to join them; under rule 18(a), TT can join even if CC was the plaintiff in

claim 1.
