## Question 1

         Many, but not all, procedural safeguards contemplated in the Sniadach line of

cases and in Vitek make the system less accessible to litigants. While providing a lawyer

to all civil litigants may improve access to justice, there are less expensive solutions.

Perhaps the Eldridge test could be altered to include the effect new safeguards have on

accessibility. Alternatively, agencies could be designed to improve access for pro se

litigants, perhaps by eliminating or modifying the adversarial system.

         Some Vitek/Restatement procedural safeguards do not inherently complicate the

system. For example, notice often does so only because the language used is needlessly

abstruse. Similarly, a notice of rights can clarify the system if written clearly and simply.

Having independent decisionmakers instead of clerks might cost more, but it also need

not complicate the system; the adjudicator has familiarity with the law and, if trained

properly, can make it more accessible.

         But for many procedural safeguards, there is an inherent conflict between

protecting litigants and making litigation less accessible. In-person hearings like the one

guaranteed in Sniadach create procedure, from paperwork to obscure rules. They are

inaccessible to indigent litigants, especially those who can't take paid leave from work.

Vitek notes that the hearing should be "sufficiently after the notice to permit the prisoner

to prepare," but a litigant cannot become familiar with obscure legal rules in a few weeks.

Similarly, many pro se litigants, like the mother in Lassiter, are ill-equipped to call

witnesses and conduct direct and cross-examination. Even a statement of fact from the

adjudicator complicates the proceedings for those without literacy in legal English.

         Unfortunately, many of these safeguards are often necessary, especially when

liberty interests are at stake. A hearing was necessary in Goldberg to protect welfare

recipients. Similarly, witnesses are necessary in cases with many factual questions, like

Doehr.

         One possible solution that the commentator suggests and that the civil-Gideon

movement advocates is to provide lawyers to many civil litigants. Using the Eldridge

test, the indigent party has a strong private interest in counsel, and a lawyer lowers the

risk of erroneous deprivation. But lawyers are expensive. And as Justice Powell notes in

Vitek, lawyers complicate proceedings just by being there. Proceedings for certain

liberties, like the parental rights in Lassiter, are so important that they benefit from such

complication. Perhaps with enough political will and money, such a system could be

implemented. Without it, mandating state-provided lawyers risks creating in civil courts a

situation like criminal justice in states where public defense is underfunded, defendants

meet their lawyers on the day of trial, and they have literally minutes in court.

         One solution to this conflict could be adding a fourth factor to the Eldridge test:

effect on accessibility. The current test purports to weigh private interests but fails to

consider this crucial factor. This test could make the system efficient by preventing

safeguards that complicate more than they help. The Turner court could have used this to

mandate the presence of a neutral social worker or a notice about "ability to pay", both of

which it briefly mentions. This test doesn't tell judges how to assess accessibility or low-

income people's needs, something they are ill-equipped to do.

         Another solution could be to design agency adjudications to better meet the needs

of their communities. While such a system might disrupt the balance between the

executive and judiciary, Congress controls federal courts through the N&PC and can

restrict their jurisdiction. Each type of case, from Social Security benefits to prisoner's

liberty interests, would go through a separate adjudication system. These would be

designed to meet each litigant's needs better; a welfare court could have social workers

and community members contribute. This allocates expertise efficiently but could create

a huge, inefficient bureaucracy. Too much division might itself create more complication;

one advantage of the court system is its ability to adjudicate diverse matters in a single

case. Furthermore, a patchwork of agency adjudication systems might require rural

litigants to travel to far-off agencies, not the local courthouse.

         A more radical way to design agency adjudications is to eliminate the adversarial

system and its impartial adjudicators altogether. Adjudicators and their clerks could go

out into their communities to conduct investigations. They would be more accessible to

the public. This eliminates many complex proceedings, lessens the need for lawyers, and

makes outcomes fairer. But it requires many more judges and many more facilities

scattered throughout jurisdictions. It would also require many new procedural safeguards.

Perhaps most difficult, this type of system requires a different conception of justice:

instead of a formidable justice in a marble courthouse that lowly supplicants approach,

justice would be on the street, among the people.

-------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------

## Question 2

         The court must verify sua sponte that it has SMJ, IPJ, and Venue. DJ: Fillius is a

ME domiciliary (incorporation and PPoB), and defendants are NJ

domiciliaries(Strawbridge complete diversity). AIC is met ($3,300,000).

         AUJ: There's no federal cause of action, but there might be Smith-Grable AUJ

because the definition of mail-delivery in a federal statute is at issue. This is a mixed

question of law and fact. Taking it would flood the federal system with new cases, so

Smith-Grable is unlikely.

         IPJ: There's no general IPJ because the defendants are NJ

domiciliaries. NY has specific IPJ because the defendants purposely availed themselves

of the benefits of working in NY, where they made the corporate decisions in question

(International Shoe). This is fair and reasonable because they can be expected to be haled

into court in NY, and Newark is close to Manhattan. Long-arm and 42(k)(1)(A) give NY

IPJ. SDoNY has venue because the decisions were made in Manhattan (1391(b)(2)).

         AJ: JAMOL appeal doesn't fit under 1291 (no final judgment), Cohen (later

appeal possible), 54(b) (only one claim), 1292(a) (no injunction), or mandamus (no

immediate need/irreparable harm). 1292(b) DD may fit: Jorkin said it would be "good to

know" if she were wrong, but also that she "cannot imagine" she was. This statement

might be a sufficient signal to give the Second Circuit discretion to hear it.

         JAMOL: FRCP 50 requires that with all facts in the light most favorable to the

defense, a rational jury could have found the way this jury did. A rational jury could

believe the defendants' testimony, not believe their emails, and find they did not know of

the accident rate. Denying MJAMOL was proper.

         New Trial: FRCP 59 requires a judge to weigh law and justice on both sides. If

the emails weren't forged, the great weight of the evidence favors the plaintiff. The

defendants were likely lying. Jorkins properly granted a new trial.

-------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------

## Question 3

         CP: Federal and NY CP law is the same, so there are no intersystem preclusion

issues. The SDoNY retrial (L1) had a final judgment, even if the 2d Circuit hadn't ruled

yet (it has). The facts, which concerned whether the defendants' decisions led to Fillius'

loss, are exactly the same, so it's the same claim (CNOF). The defendants are the same.

The plaintiffs are in privity: Slughorn is the sole owner of Fillius and she sued in that

capacity in L1. Slughorn is claim precluded.

         IP: Only Slughorn can raise IP because she won. If L1 was just a DJ case,

rendering-court-state (NY) preclusion law is used (Semtek), and no mutuality is required.

If L1 was both a DJ and a Smith-Grable AUJ case, the law is unclear: federal or NY

preclusion law may be used. If federal law is used, mutuality is probably met because

Slughorn and Fillius are in privity, making them effectively the same party (see privity

analysis above). If not, this is NMOCE, which is generally not permitted (Parklane). But

Slughorn couldn't intervene in L1 without violating diversity (NJ domicile). This case is

smaller, so the defendants have no new incentives. There is no evidence of new

procedural opportunities, so NMOCE is permitted here.

         There are three issues: Chudley needing a license, defendants acting outrageously,

and their actions causing a drop in stock price. Although there's no evidence of their

inclusion in the decision, all three must have been decided for L1 to come out as it did.

The first and third were necessary for L1 to award Fillius any damages and the second for

Fillius to get punitives. All were actually litigated and necessary to the decision, and the

same issues are in L2. Slughorn can issue preclude in L2, but she still needs to argue the

issue of damages, especially punitive damages (for which it would be difficult to

determine the "true amounts").

-------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------

## Question 4

Directors and Officers Count

         No CP (not same parties); no IP (we lost).

         SMJ: Complete diversity: Tonks is a VA domiciliary and the defendants NJ

domiciliaries. AIC-deficient ($9,900). Maybe AUJ under Smith-Grable (Question 2), but

this is unlikely. If not, the count should be dismissed for lacking SMJ.

         SJ: Plaintiffs might try to use Count II as an anchoring claim. Even though the

decline in stock value and the crash both happened because Chudley flew drones, the

accident could have happened if Chudley had a license. There are two separate CNOFs,

so EDoVA can't exercise SJ.

         IPJ: The defendants are NJ domiciliaries, so no general IPJ. Nothing suggests they
sought the benefits of VA law by having Chudley have stockholders in VA; they didn't

control Tonks (International Shoe). It's not fair and reasonable for them to be sued in VA.

They weren't on notice, and it'd be inconvenient to VA courts to hear suits about NY

corporations. The count should be dismissed.

         Venue: Improper (absent special shareholder-derivative-suit venue law) because

all defendants live in NJ (1391(b)(1)) and the corporate decision not to get a license

happened in SDoNY (1391(b)(2)).               Failure to State a Claim: The complaint meets

notice pleading; the incident it refers to is clear (Conley no-set-of-facts). Using

plausibility, the latter half of ¶8 ("Their decision...") is conclusory. When omitted, the

remaining allegations are insufficient to bump from possibility into plausbility the

allegations that defendants acted outrageously and that they caused Tonks a $900 loss.

The complaint doesn't meet plausibility.

         Pleading standards (like FRCP 12(b)(6)) are likely procedural for HCOL

purposes, so VCOL between VA notice pleading and federal plausibility pleading.

York: If a complaint meets the notice standard but not the plausibility standard, the

standard determines the outcome of the case. State law; don't dismiss.

Hanna majority/Scalia: FRCPs are valid because Congress passed the REA. Scalia might

argue that being heard in court after meeting notice but not plausibility is not a

substantive state right and that the different pleading standards clearly conflict. Federal

law; dismiss. That's begging the question. Following Walker, narrowly construe 12(b)(6):

"The pleading does not state facts sufficient to constitute a cause of action." The

plausibility standard is federal judge-made law (Twiqbal), so go to twin aims of Erie.

Different pleading standards in the same state might encourage forum-shopping and lead

to inequitable administration of laws, e.g. when plaintiffs don't have enough information

to meet the plausibility standard (e.g. Twiqbal). State law applies; don't dismiss.

Harlan: Pleading standards don't generally affect primary conduct, except when

companies violate antitrust laws or discriminate because plaintiffs don't have enough

information to meet a higher pleading standard. This probably isn't enough to make it

substantive. Federal law; dismiss.

Ginsberg: When setting pleading standards, states control the amount of litigation

(policy). Consistent with Walker, 12(b)(6) only requires that there be a standard for

stating a claim, while VA law creates one. VA law; don't dismiss.

Stevens: Same test as Ginsberg, but plausibility and notice pleading clearly conflict, so

federal law; dismiss.

Chudley Count

         SMJ: DJ because Chudley incorporated in Delaware, PPoB in NY. Tonks is a VA
domiciliary. Complete diversity, and AIC met ($2,200,000). No AUJ; state claim.

         IPJ: VA doesn't have general IPJ over Chudley (only DE, NY do). Chudley was

sending the drone to a VA store, purposely availing itself of the benefits of doing

business in VA. Minimal contacts are met. It's fair and reasonable to be haled into court

in connection with supply delivery in VA (15 stores and $1,000,000,000 in VA

revenues). VA's long-arm and 42(k)(1)(A) give VA specific IPJ.

         Venue: Although the crash was in WV (1391(b)(2)), venue is proper in EDoVA if

Chudley had sufficient contacts EDoVA to have IPJ if it were a separate state (1391(d)).

Chudley likely has stores in EDoVA, but the more relevant contacts are the store the

drone was being sent to. If it was on its way to EDoVA, venue is likely proper; if it was
on its way to WDoVA, it should be transferred there.

         Failure to State a Claim: See VCOL above. The complaint meets the notice

standard (similar to Form 11); it specifies the drone number and puts Chudley on notice

about the event. It also meets plausibility; Chudley admits it likely wouldn't have flown

there if they'd investigated, making it plausibly negligent.

$2,000,000,000 Punitives

         For HCOL, damages are substantive and VA (Second Restatement) would apply

law of the state relevant to the issue of negligence. Longbottom works in WV (even

though his division covers VA and WV) and the crash happened there because Chudley

didn't investigate its flight paths in WV. WV law probably applies.

         If so and notice pleading applies (see above), the court won't dismiss (¶15 says

"reckless"), but Tonks will have difficulty proving recklessness. If plausibility applies,

nothing in the claim makes recklessness plausible (failure to investigate insufficient), so

the $2,000,000,000 punitives should be dismissed.

Separation

         SJ is improper because of different CNOFs (see above). Count II has SMJ, but

Count I doesn't (unless Smith/Grable). Count I should be dismissed.

         The directors were improperly joined. T/O is not the same (20(a)(2)(A)) and there

is no commmon question of law or fact (accident/failure to investigate is separate from

not getting license) (20(a)(2)(B)).
         The court can also separate under Rule 42.
