## Question 1

Claims are under state law, so no AU. No Smith-Grable. SMJ from diversity. Anchoring
claim is against Riddle, as he meets AIC and diversity if he is indeed a citizen of RI, as
the complaint alleges. But this is questionable, and we need to look at domicile: although
he was certainly a RI resident up through business school (Mas) and continues to vote in
RI and spends time there on weekends, he works in MA, spends most of his time there,
and owns an apartment there. If Riddle is MA domiciliary, complete diversity
(Strawbridge) broken and no SMJ. Supplemental jurisdiction over Droobles, who is
diverse but AIC deficient. Unclear after Exxon whether under 1367(b) AIC deficiency
defeats supplemental jurisdiction over joined defendant. If yes, the claim against
Droobles must be dismissed for SMJ lack.

4(k)(1)(a) MA federal court piggybacks off of MA state long arm. Hard to dismiss
anchoring claim against Riddle for IPJ. General IPJ over Riddle if domiciled in MA (but
then SMJ problem as above), or if essentially at home due to continuous and systematic
contacts with state. This is likely. Harder to establish general IPJ over Droobles, because
Daimler requires a large proportion of its business be done in forum state. Is 20%
enough? If no general IPJ, then argue against specific IPJ. International Shoe minimal
contacts questionable: didn't purposefully reach into MA or purposefully avail itself of
MA laws (no advertising). Maybe the volume of business in MA enough to indicate to
Droobles that MA was regular place of using the product, but merely placing product in
stream of commerce usually not enough (McIntyre, Volkswagen). Plus, not really
Droobles's product that is at issue. What about intentional tort? This is a bit like Griffis v.

Luban effects test: brunt of tort felt in forum, but probably not aimed specifically at MA
itself. Not enough to know that the plaintiff resided within the forum. so insufficient
contacts for specific IPJ.

Venue proper under 1391(b)(2) because the events leading to the action (loss of business
value) were in MA.

Dismiss for insufficient process if MA procedure rules apply, since HG didn't attach
required additional documents. HCOL MA will use this rule, because procedure defined
broadly. But FRCP don't require. So run Erie. York: the difference in rule is the
difference between dismissal and survival, outcome-determinative, so use state law
(really concerned with federalism and fed vs. state just being change in courthouse, not in
law). Harlan: Would just change attorney behavior in filing, no way to affect primary
conduct of parties (which is true domain of states), so use federal law. Scalia/Hanna:
REA is source of law, presumably valid (Sibbach: does it really regulate procedure?
certainly yes). Also, an FRCP has never been held invalid so that is an ever-so-slight
consideration. Applicable here because it covers exact same requirements and process as
MA rule. Use federal. Ginsburg/Hanna: Same validity analysis, but avoid conflict
through applicability prong. State interest here in making sure defendants know how to
access justice system and defend themselves, with a particular eye to poorer defendants.
Protect that interest by saying MA rule is merely a further requirement upon accepted
FRCP, and no clash. Use state law.

Possibly dismiss for failure to state claim under Twiqbal plausibility pleading standard.

Eliminate conclusory statements and then see if remaining factual allegations nudge
claim across line from possible to plausible. There's a good amount of facts alleged, but
do they make the claim plausible? HG is relying on a lot of assumptions based only off of
the one email. Major assumption that "I don't accept" line was edited. Central questions:
will court believe that the claim is so unlikely to succeed on the merits so as to not justify
judicial resources spent on proceedings? Also don't want to subject defendants to
harassment by frivolous lawsuits.

-------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------

Answer-to-Question-__2_

A) We want MA law for the defense to apply in NH court so HG can't recover as matter
of law. It's hard to argue that the defense is procedural, so do an HCoL analysis. If MA
fed court not happy, then NH state HCoL applies (Klaxon). First restatement, so lex loci
delicti. The last element of the tort was the loss of value to HG, which occurred in MA.
So apply MA law.

If MA was a happy court: MA fed court uses MA state HCoL (Klaxon), so Second
Restatement. Look at individual issues, not whole case: so here look just at the public
access defense (not the tort claim). HG is domiciled in MA, and the media outlets HG
uses would be MA outlets or at least HG would broadcast from within MA. Relationship
between parties (HG's use of Droobles's product) in MA. For keeping laws uniform and
avoiding frankenlaw: questionable whether MA or NH tort law would apply (last act in
tort in MA, but substantial evidence in NH, and second restatement would account for
that) neutral factor here. However, Babcock/Neumeier indicates reduced willingness to
apply a state's law to protect foreign parties (Droobles is from NH). State interest in
protecting own citizens would actually cut against its applying its own law here. So tough
call.

If MA law permitting the defense applies, the crucial question of fact would then be
whether HG had constant and ready access to public or media outlets. Do Celotex
analysis. Burden of persuasion on Droobles here, probably met because of Harry's social
media presence. In its cross motion, HG would need to show that there is a genuine
dispute of fact in order to survive the motion.

B) Not clear that evidence in deposition record overwhelmingly favors movant as
happened in Scott v. Harris. So go through Celotex analysis. HG has burden of
persuasion at trial for Droobles's lability for the tort. Burden of production probably met:
if unrefuted, the emails from Droobles to Riddle and from Riddle to the anonymous
account, contextualized by Lily's testimony, may require rational trier of fact to find for
HG. But Droobles/Riddle probably also meet their resulting burden of production:
genuine issue of fact for trial in that no memory of the events. Court must read record in
best light for non movant, so probably won't grant summary judgment.

-------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------

Answer-to-Question-__3_

Not immediately appealable because not a final judgment under 1291. Liberty Mutual.
No damages have been awarded yet. Can't use 1292(A) because not an injunction.
Probably can't use 1292(b) because, even though may argue that several of the
requirements for double discretion met, there's just not many special aspects of this case
that would convince a trial judge that an immediate appellate court decision is required on
an issue. Judge gave no indication that he was stumped by the case. Not 54(b) because
even though there are two claims (Droobles and Riddle), neither is final, and both are
extremely related. Definitely no Cohen exception. Can't get writ because no risk of
irreparable harm.

-------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------

## Question 4_

All states here use same claim preclusion law, so an inter system analysis is not needed
for claim preclusion. Harry will probably be claim precluded. It's the exact same claim,
and probably a final judgment on the merits: even with the settlement, the court still
dismissed the case with prejudice. Harry is probably in privity with HG: even though he
is not the sole shareholder, he is the majority shareholder, CEO, and "runs the business."
This is likely enough to show that Harry sufficiently controlled HG during the previous
litigation. Ginny probably won't be claim precluded. She is probably not in privity with
HG, since she is merely the VP and owns only 5% of its shares.

Droobles may be issue precluded on his participation in the business disparagement
scheme:

For Mutuality: We are in NH state court now, with the rendering court being NH federal.
Sitting in diversity, so use federal common law to determine preclusion law: the law of
the state of the rendering court is applied (Semtek). But is this NH or MA law? If the NH
federal court applied NH law, this isn't an issue. NH preclusion law would apply. But if
the transfer from MA fed court carried MA law with it, this may mean that the relevant
state law for the NH fed court is MA law, in which case no mutuality is required. We
want a mutuality requirement, though, so argue that the rendering NH federal court's

power is what is important, not the law of the MA fed court that was transferred over, and
therefore use the law of the state in which the federal court literally sits. NH requires
strict mutuality. If strict mutuality, Ginny cannot issue preclude Droobles. But Harry may
still be able to, due to privity (see above). If no mutuality requirement, then Ginny would
be permitted to use ONMCE.

For Actually Litigated: could make the argument that the issue was dropped due to the
settlement, but this seems weak. Summary judgment on the issue was granted. For
Necessary to Decision: do summary judgments have enough finality to constitute a
decision? It's questionable here, as no final judgment was entered; the suit was dismissed.
We could also make an argument based on Rios that the issue decided was gratuitous, as
HG settled with Riddle and the suit was dismissed. Though the facts are pretty different
here from Rios, Droobles likewise had no chance to appeal the summary judgment ruling
on his participation, and so should not be precluded from contesting the issue here.

Under Hart, court may be able to grant more preclusive effect than rendering court, but
this is unclear. Hope that it doesn't for the issue preclusion question.

-------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------

Answer-to-Question-__5_

First look at SMJ. Only care about named plaintiffs for diversity (Ben-Hur). Harry would
have the anchoring claim here: his AIC is $650k as the 65% shareholder. Does not matter
that Ginny as a named plaintiff doesn't meet AIC, just need one (Exxon). SMJ met.

Rule 23 may not be met if due to numerosity. There are over 20 but under 40 members,
so look at other factors. Smallest claim would be for $15k, which is not insubstantial. We
could argue that these claims aren't small enough to justify a class. However, the
geographic dispersion (shareholders on the west coast) cuts in favor of certifying.
Commonality easy to meet, even after Wal-Mart, because there is a single T/O for the
same loss of value for all claims being brought by the class. Though the value of Harry
and Ginny's claims substantially larger and maybe atypical of class, the crux is they legal
theory is still the same, and due to the structure of the proposed division of damages, their
incentives will be to maximize damages for everyone. This also accomplishes
representativeness. We could perhaps argue that Harry himself wasn't aggrieved in the
same way as the other class members, as he was personally attacked by the ad. This may
alter his incentives compared to the rest of the class.

This is a suit for damages, so 23(b)(3). Predominance very likely met due to commonality
analysis above. Schutts resulting in increased HCoL analyses unlikely to be a problem

because we can probably use one state's law for all claims (NH or MA) due to there being
a single T/O. For superiority of a class action to individual suits, we could make a related
argument to the numerosity concerns above: the claims aren't too small individually.

-------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------

Answer-to-Question-__6_

Additional proposed rule: Remove the Parklane factor of plaintiff ease of joining L1 in
applying ONMCE. So now, the fact that P2 could have easily intervened in L1 is
irrelevant to determining whether they could exercise ONMCE in L2 against D1. The
policy interest here may be in not coercing additional potential plaintiffs into intervening
in litigation they may not want to, for fear of having to re litigate a contentious or
expensive issue should they choose to bring a subsequent suit.

The primary advantages of the first (the exam's) proposal would be judicial efficiency in
subsequent suits and greater finality. If more issues are disposed of in L1, fewer resources
need to be spent down the line in hearing these issues. There's even more resource-saving
if we can preclude issues upon which no time or effort was spent at all. All parties still
had their day in court, so the rule seems equitable. What's more, If rules around raising
particular issues and defenses during L1 were loosened (for example, loosening the
immutability of the pre-trial order), there would be an even stronger argument that the
parties had sufficient opportunities to have issues heard in the initial litigation.

However, there are many more downsides. There would ironically be a loss of efficiency
for the initial litigation, as the parties would now be incentivized to raise every possible
issue, as this will always be more strategically desirable than losing on every one by

default. One could also make a due process argument that an issue warrants its own day
in court, analogous to parties. Losses in court will become much more severe and far-
reaching to the losing party if they don't raise issues, perhaps functionally depriving them
of rights further down the road. This system will also advantage wealth and experience
with the legal system even more than at present, as good lawyering in recognizing every
potential issue becomes vital. Even if you may have easily won on the merits of an issue
in L2, you will lose if your attorney failed to raise it in L1. Indeed, corporations and other
repeat players in the legal system will easily pick up which issues they must routinely
raise, while everyone else will be disadvantaged. Preclusion doctrine is obscure enough to
where one would need an actual attorney, not just an expert of some type (see Powell in
Vitek) to navigate it. Litigation will also cost more if there are more issues to adjudicate.

The second proposed rule would make it easier to apply ONMCE, as a party could now
do so even if they could have joined the original litigation. Any expansion of ONMCE
has some clear general issues. It would encourage potential plaintiffs to sit on the
sidelines of litigation. Though we may be concerned about not forcing a party to join, we
are probably more concerned with efficiency in consolidating lawsuits when possible. On
top of this, the threat of ONMCE would make defendants much more likely to settle in
order to avoid any final judgment that subsequent plaintiffs could use against them.
Though we generally want parties to settle for the sake of judicial efficiency, there should
be some concern over the power imbalance that is created. Circumstances may arise
where the defendant is willing to pay exorbitantly more than P1 may individually be
justly owed, as P1 has outsized bargaining power when D1 is threatened by the specter of
many more subsequent plaintiffs using a ruling against it.
