## Question 1

SMJ
No SMJ through AUJ: no embedded federal question (Mottley) and no crucial embedded
federal issue (Smith-Grable).

Look to Diversity, with requirement for complete diversity. HGInc. domiciled by place of
incorporation (MA) and PPoB (MA). Droobles domiciled in NH. Issue is Riddle, who
may be domiciled in RI or MA. Riddle born in RI, maintains RI voter registration, and
spends every weekend in RI. But, has paid MA income taxes for 15 years and owns
apartment in MA where he sleeps on weeknights. Possible that court will see domicile in
RI since he still travels back and demonstrates no intent to change voter registration; also
possible court sees domicile as MA, where he spends most of his time, has his place of
business, and where he pays taxes. If latter, dismiss for lack of complete diversity.

If Riddle kicked out for lack of SMJ, no sufficient AIC for suit against Droobles

(50,000<75,000) and suit against Droobles must be dismissed. If Riddle not kicked out
for SMJ, look to whether Droobles can be joined through supplemental jurisdiction since
there is no independent jurisdiction for Droobles suit (insufficient AIC for DJ). Likely
that Droobles suit not permissible under §1367, since Droobles' suit was a claim by a
plaintiff against a party joined by Rule 20(a)(2).

PJ
No general IPJ over Droobles in MA or over Riddle if domiciled in RI: there is general

IPJ over Riddle if domiciled in MA, but then suit kicked out for SMJ.

Specific IPJ if long-arm to limits of Constitution and DP through minimum contacts and
traditional notions of fair play (International Shoe). 4(k)(1)(a) says FDC uses long-arm of
state in which it sits: MA has valid long-arm.

Probably fine for Riddle: offer for purchase received in MA, has MA office, and conducts
most business external to suit in MA (purposeful availment of state and could reasonably
foresee being haled into court; contra: J. McIntyre and Daimler).

Less sure for Droobles: no advertising in MA so unlikely he targeted sales in MA (J.
McIntyre). Goods regularly flow (25% of business), but no intentional availment or
solicitation. Suggests no IPJ over Droobles: can dismiss.

Venue
No venue under 1391(a): Droobles and Riddle not domiciled in same state. Look to

1391(b).

Substantial portion of events occurred in MA: gum taste test, receipt of emails, and
receipt of business valuations (last act for Tort purposes). Relies on court determining
that an email is where a person receives it: within realm of possibility. If website
constitutes property, could argue that website exists where content is created and
uploaded. Since HG creates all content, property impacted in suit could reasonably be in
MA. Likely cannot dismiss for lack of venue.

If MA not valid under 1391(b), couldn't use 1391(c) since venue also proper in NH.

Pleading

Likely cannot dismiss for failure to state a claim. Under Twiqbal, remove conclusory
statements and determine plausibility of remaining facts. Complaint alleges with
specificity via email that meeting at Droobles estate occurred, that HG received repeated
emails from Riddle including threat to reduce value of company, that HG has never been
to Droobles estate, and that value of HGInc. dropped. Court could argue that, since emails
were not provided, these are not adequate preliminary facts--this is unlikely.

No substantial policy reasons to dismiss case for failure to plead: unlikely to be a high-
cost discovery case since all companies are small and complaint deals with short time
period.

Notice and Service of Process
Service likely sufficient, since Droobles and attorneys received complaint.

Discrepancy between FRCP and MARCP. Erie analysis to determine whether motion to
dismiss for failure to provide separate document satisfying MARCP 4(a)(1)(h).

York outcome-determinative says MARCP results in dismissal while FRCP does not, so
use MARCP. Harlan says how lawyers file and notify unlikely to impact pre-litigation

conduct, so use FRCP. Under Scalia, FRCP valid since it doesn't "abridge, enlarge, or
modify" a state substantive right (permissible under REA) and applicable since it "really
regulates procedure" (Shady Grove): use FRCP. Under Ginsburg, FRCP valid under REA
but not applicable since no actual conflict: FRCP more permissive than MARCP and
doesn't bar additional requirements listed in MARCP 4(a)(1)(h), so use MARCP.

If following York or Ginsburg, dismiss. If following Harlan or Scalia, no dismissal for
failure to provide additional sheet unless other elements of FRCP 4(a)(1) not met.

-------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------

Answer-to-Question-__2_

Summary judgment available if no genuine issue of material fact and movant entitled to
judgment as a matter of law (FRCP 56).

SJ for Public Access
Moving party bears burden of persuasion on affirmative defense. Must produce evidence
that, if unrebutted, would require a rational trier of fact to find in their favor (Celotex).

Defense a substantive question and only available in MA: do HCOL to determine
whether permissible. HCOL carries if transferor court had proper PJ and Venue. As stated
above, venue likely proper but unclear if MA District Court (MADC) had PJ over
Droobles. HCOL done by state choice-of-law rules.

If MADC had PJ, use HCOL analysis from transferor state (MA). MA is 2nd
Restatement: use Lex Loci Delicti (LLD) plus relevant state interest. Last event is loss of
value, which was likely in MA. HGInc. incorporated in MA, suggesting value is there.
Emails determining value also sent to HG in MA, so discovery of loss occurred in MA.
Could also have been where video filmed (NH) or edited (unknown), but likely to be
receipt of email (MA). Competing state interests: two parties voluntarily engaging in
business in MA but one party has nearly insignificant connections to MA and does all

business in NH. Center of gravity unclear, since most of this occurred online. Could
argue NH has greater access to witnesses but that MA has greater access to any paper
dealings of Riddle. Court likely to use LLD and use MA law with small possibility of NH
law.

If MADC did not have PJ, use HCOL analysis from transferee state (NH). NH is 1st
Restatement: use LLD. LLD likely in MA (see above). Use MA law.

If using NH law, cannot use this defense since only exists in MA. Motion will fail.

If using MA law, have access to affirmative defense and likely success. Law applies to
shareholders. HG is majority shareholder and has constant access to the public through
social media outlets: business model relies on website, Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, and
other accounts. Videos and posts involve HG's face and he bills himself as followers'
"independent voice." All revenue stems from posts, suggesting access is constant and
ready. Court may not consider social media a traditional media outlet under statute, but

seems unlikely.

Court likely to grant motion: nothing in record suggests HG doesn't have access to public.

SJ for Liability
No conflict in law; no HCOL analysis.

Moving party (HG) bears burden of persuasion. E1 met by testimony from Evans that

Droobles and Riddle participated in production of video, supported by fact that Droobles
shared tape in email and was present in video. E2 met as video had been edited: HG
testifies he wasn't there, Evans testifies HG wasn't there, and Droobles statement "I do not
accept that" became "I accept that." E3 met by diminished ad revenue (reduced standing).
E4 implied by devaluation of business (would want to know if offer for $5,000,000 was

anomalous and other offers closer to $3,900,000 or if other concurrent factors dropped
value).

Biggest challenge is lack of proven reputation damage (element three). While intuitive
that reputation based on independent evaluation would be tarnished by allegations of
purchased sponsorship, would want to prove that no other elements could have caused
drop in value. Still possible that judge would conclude no genuine issue of material fact
and grant judgment for HG as matter of law.

-------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------

## Question 3_

No.

No final judgement: no §1291 appeal. No final judgement on one claim while other
claims still being adjudicated and can delay to appeal until after judgment entered: no
54(b) appeal. On the merits, no final order, and is reviewable later: no appeal under
Cohen Exception. No trial judge certification of important decision: no §1292(b) appeal.
No injunction: no §1292(a)(1) appeal. Not a class: no 23(f) appeal. Writ of Mandamus
possible to force decision to allow appeal (§1651), but unlikely that court of appeals will
find requirement for speed or high likelihood that petitioner is correct.

-------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------

## Question 4_

Claim Preclusion
No HCOL: CP law the same. Same claim asserted: same T&O as L1. There's privity:
same defendant and plaintiffs had control over the litigation in L1. Dismissal with
prejudice final. Unclear if on-the-merits: if a federal court is sitting in diversity, borrow
the law of the state where the rendering court sits and give at least as much preclusion as
the rendering state (Semtek). L1 in Federal NH court using DJ, so give at least as much
preclusion as NH state. NH will probably see dismissal with prejudice as on-the-merits,
since it came after a SJ that decided Droobles participated in scheme.

If on merits, either party can preclude. If not, no preclusion.

Only preclusive if SMJ was valid in L1(Marrese).

Issue Preclusion

Droobles won no issues in L1: he cannot preclude.

HG and GW might be able to preclude. Ruling sufficiently final: settled with no appeal.
Same issues as in L1. Unsure if settlement means issue was actually litigated, but likely

that summary judgment in favor of HGInc. means issue of whether Riddle&Droobles
committed the tort was actually litigated. Determination of common scheme suggests
Droobles' liability is severable from Riddles' liability and would allow preclusion (contra:
Russell).

If all above factors were met, would do HCOL for mutuality using Semtek. Use NH law:
NH requires strict mutuality. Could argue that HGInc. not same party as HG (inc. v.
person) so issue preclusion would not run. Could argue that HGInc. is the same party as
HG since HG is majority stakeholder, CEO, and Chair of Board, so issue preclusion
would run.

-------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------

## Question 5_

State court: AUJ or DJ under Ben-Hur/Exxon irrelevant.

No conflict between FRCP and NHRCP: no Erie.

Class Certification Requirements

Numerosity possible. 22 shareholders that are geographically dispersed: suggests joinder
too difficult. 20 potential suits only $15,000 (.015%x1,000,000): members unlikely to
litigate on their own (lawyers and filings too expensive). All cases arose in MA: IPJ
should be fine over all unnamed members, so numerosity preserved (Shutts).
Discretionary, but judge would probably grant.

Commonality likely. Common scheme involved in all suits (diminution of value) and
same/similar issues of law and fact, like whether the actions met standard of business
disparagement.

Typicality likely. Named plaintiff typical of class, since all seeking similar compensation
for same wrong (only difference is amount). HG has no conflicting incentive: arguably,
has bigger incentive to fight for class since he is majority stakeholder. Only potential

issue is refusal since he has more at stake (unlikely, since he settled L1).

Representativeness likely. Named plaintiff a member of the class and aggrieved in the
same way.

Requirements Specific to 23(b)(3)
Seeking damages; certify as 23(b)(3).

Predominance likely. Common issues predominate; discovery and testimony like the
same. This is essentially identical to commonality analysis (Wal-Mart).

Superiority likely. See numerosity argument. But, no experts involved--litigation could
be cheap so could do individual suits.

-------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------

## Question 6_

Claim preclusion: add that all dismissals (including for FNC, SMJ, PJ, and venue) are
now on-the-merits. Expansion of preclusion will likely increase efficiency but decrease
fairness to those who lack sophisticated understanding of court system.

Such a policy would support judicial efficiency by reducing refilings and dismissing
current cases. Parties would be incentivized to bring all claims at once, preventing future
suits and expediting decision-making. There's social benefit in having cases consolidated:
expedites restitution and helps parties to move on. Parties would also be discouraged
from filing frivolous lawsuits designed to harass defendants and instead focus on the
merits of the case. Parties would be encouraged to abstain from forum shopping for fear
of dismissal. This would also push more cases into state court, as parties wouldn't want to

risk having improper SMJ. This would support federalism, state adjudication of state
issues, and equitable administration of laws within the same region. Making permissive
counterclaims compulsory would encourage plaintiffs to research prior to filing to gain a
complete picture. Keeping cases in state court could be beneficial to plaintiffs--
particularly middle and low-income individuals--since federal courts tend to be more
favorable to big corporations.

The scheme also meets Vitek factors since it leaves intact the right to the first trial and all

associated due process protections.

The policy could be seen as balancing power between plaintiff and defendant, since
plaintiff would be held to a higher standard of review and would be subject to
consequences for mistakes that arguably should be corrected prior to filing. Could also

incentivize corporations to choose FSCs that don't fight the public interest.

However, such a policy would be unfair--particularly for pro se clients without
knowledge of FRCP. Since the complexity of FRCP favors large corporations and those
who can afford expensive counsel, adding more procedural dismissals to the "on-the-
merits" category could incentivize crafty lawyering on behalf of defendants to get more
cases dismissed with prejudice through purely procedural means. A particular issue
would be with hidden FSCs: claims against corporations would be dismissed by the
handful because it's likely many plaintiffs are unaware they've even signed an FSC or that
the clause will not be challenged despite unconscionability or unfair bargaining practices.
Challenging to seriously argue that plaintiffs should have their suit claim-precluded

simply because they poorly interpreted FRCP or didn't know about a claim they could
have filed.

Requiring all permissive counterclaims could lead to issues under Twiqbal, where
plaintiffs are unable to plead with enough specificity prior to discovery to prevent these
cases from being dismissed.

Including FNC in this proposal would give judges even more discretionary power, since

they would have the ability to dismiss a case forever simply because they thought it could
be better adjudicated elsewhere.

These two desires would also likely clash: parties could be obligated to abandon
legitimate permissible claims for fear of disrupting SMJ, PJ, or venue.

When weighing these policies, Eldridge test tells us that private interest in having chance
to correct mistakes and reserve right to sue probably doesn't outweigh government
interest in efficiency. Unlikely to cause too much erroneous deprivation; scheme still
allows full case in front of a judge with opportunity to present evidence.

Could mitigate issues by simplifying FRCP for SMJ, PJ, and venue. Removal of AIC
requirements would allow more cases into federal court but make DJ easier to understand.
Removal of DJ entirely would simplify the boundary between state and federal court and
speed up growth of state law development. This is unlikely to prejudice out-of-state
defendants: frequent movement obviates distinction between in-state and out-of-state.

Could also mitigate issues by providing access to counsel (unlikely by Lassiter/Turner
precedent and fact that plaintiff would be receiving counsel) or providing non-counsel
safeguards like simple guides to FRCP, non-lawyer advocates to explain and guide
plaintiffs, or online filing that explains potential consequences prior to submitting file.
