1.

SMJ

AUJ: Probably no fed COA (Mottley/Holmes), but maybe Smith-Grable AUJ. Congress has substantial federal interest in passing Business Disparagement (BD). However, using fed jurisdiction for state-law COA might overwhelm federal court with cases. Also fact-bound, not just law. Likely no AUJ.

DJ: HG is citizen of MA with nerve center. Hertz. DD is citizen of NH. TR is RI citizen but might be citizen of MA for paying taxes, job, home there. If TR MA citizen, no DJ. If TR RI citizen, DJ exists. Claims alleging joint liability against multiple defendants valued on entire amount claimed so million$ meets AIC. Likely DJ.

Venue

No venue under §1391(b)(1): defendants domiciled in NH and RI, not MA. No venue under

§1392(b)(2): substantial events happened in DD estate in NH. Under §1391(b)

(3) no venue since action may be brought somewhere else. No venue.

PJ

No general IPJ, since DD domiciled in NH, TR domiciled RI and will likely object to PJ. Federal court "piggy-backs" on the long-arm statute of the state in which it sits. 4(k)(1)(a). MA, RI, NH all have long-arm going to lengths of constitution. BD is substantive not procedural and fed court in diversity uses COL in state sits in for substantive. Klaxon. RI/NH 1st restatement so blood in NH video filmed in DD house. MA 2nd restatement so has substantial interest because all businesses in MA and center of gravity there, with TR having home there.

Minimal contacts: TR works/has home in Boston and DD ships products to MA so availed themselves to MA. International Shoe, McGee. TR has home in Boston and HG in Boston so convenient there and fair. RI only 1-hour train ride from Boston so arguably fair too. However, NH is further by train to MA, 3 hours, so might not be fair. Shorter drive 1 hour so possibly fair. IPJ exists.

Due Process

Notice

Likely timely enough to respond (Roller), method appropriate (Flowers), but maybe not adequate information, but will detail why in Eerie.

Opportunity to be heard

Damages so no property at stake. Plaintiff has to show Clerk signed off so not wrongful. Little risk of erroneous deprivation.

Eerie

Conflict between FRCP4(a)(1) and MARCP4(a)(1), also requiring separate paper on summons form detailing courthouse address and nearest public transportation to courthouse. If using FRCP, don’t dismiss. If MARCP, dismiss. Issue seems procedural so substantive in VCOL, use Eerie analysis.

Also conflict with federal business disparagement (BD) law and MA BD law, with public access defense stating that plaintiff can’t recover if has access to public or media. Use Eerie.

York: Outcome determinative since outcome dependent on state vs. fed law so state rule in effect since using FRCP and MARCP differ in results and federal vs MA BD law differ in results.

Harlan: Is primary conduct affected?

For MACP4(a)(1) probably not since moved forward procedural purpose to increase access to adequate notice of due process. Could argue that hinders lawyering in making them do more work, but not the primary conduct. Probably use federal law.

For BD, could argue that HG legally savvy large entity, can affect pre-litigation conduct. However, in this case, pre-litigation conduct probably wouldn’t differ as HG denounced video and then sued. Probably use federal law.

Scalia SG: FRCP is source of law so use valid and applicable test. REA really regulates procedure so valid (Sibbach), not substantive right to  “abridge, enlarge, or modify” lawsuits. Applicable since both rules have to do with summons forms and Supremacy clause so use fed law.

Supremacy clause for federal BD law vs MA BD law so fed law overrules state law.

Ginsburg SG: Similar to Scalia test, but FRCP4(a)(1) applied narrowly (Walker) to preference state policy and elude conflict. MA implies interest in requiring lawyers write out separate paper on summons form detailing courthouse address and nearest public transportation to courthouse. Therefore, state’s interest overrules.  Don’t use FRCP and instead MARCP.

For BD, MA also has interest in judicial efficiency since savvy entities with access to public and media can probably counter falsehoods in media and not need to go to court for frivolous lawsuit. Probably use MA BD law.

Stevens SG: FOR CP4(a)(1) and BD, Stevens might side with Ginsburg since fed law can’t displace state law if intertwined with state-created right. However, might side with Scalia since in inquiry necessary to sort out whether a state procedural rule, would probably find doesn’t count as substantive right or remedy to overrule FRCP or fed BD law.

2.

To succeed summary judgment, HG has to show

1. That there is no disputed material of issue of fact and succeed in a motion for summary judgment, a movant must show

2. Movant entitled to judgment as matter of law

Yet evidence viewed more favorably to nonmoving party.

3. If couldn’t appeal, then likely not necessary to decision.

4.

Claim preclusion

CP doesn’t apply to DD because can only be offensive posture.

CP requires same claim, same parties, and final judgment on the merits. It is efficient to try these cases together and they are logically related with a central nucleus of fact. Harry and Ginny have the same claim of BD. For Harry or Ginny, they are part of HG as shareholders so claim preclusion in MA, NH, and RI might apply. Gonzalez. However, can be argued that since there are more stakeholders that they might not be same party. Settlements can count as on the merits in final judgment because the parties already decided appropriate money and for an efficient judicial economy we wouldn’t want renegotiations coming back to court or going to other courts.  Harry and Ginny can likely CP.

Issue Preclusion

For Harry and Ginny, if Smith-Grable AUJ, then probably no IP since federal judgments should be similar across the board. Parklane. Yet Harry and Ginny joining the lawsuit might have ruined diversity. This can promote a wait and see attitude which court wouldn’t want for inefficiency.  For DD, non-mutual defensive collateral estoppel is usually allowed. Blonder-Tongue. If same parties, we as D want to preclude P from relitigating an issue we lost on. Since TR gave money we say we lost. Plaintiff can say they didn’t have fair opportunity in court but have to prove it. For DD, likely IP.

5.

Commonality, Numerousity, Typicality, Representativeness needed in FRCP23a to be considered class action.

Commonality

Commonality of evidence can be the same since Harry, Ginny, and HG will use emails, video, and other forms of evidence discovered above. However, we could argue that Harry, Ginny, and HG did not suffer the same injury as Ginny suffered substantially less financially, Harry had his reputation hurt (non-financial), and HG also lost a lot of money, HCOL can also end commonality since different state laws applied. However, NH is 1st restatement so MA law will apply so there is likely commonality.

Numerousity

If below 20 plaintiffs, likely to lose. If above 40, likely to win. HG made up of Harry, Ginny, and 20 other stakeholders, so has numerousity. Since other stakeholders mostly in Western states, court also more likely to certify claims. Since amount in controversy is large amount, a million$, court likely to certify class.

Typicality

The named plaintiffs, Harry and Ginny, likely have similar incentives, to recoup losses they incurred from TR and DD.

Representativeness

We want to determine if class members were aggrieved in the same way as named plaintiffs. We could argue that since Harry and Ginny have more at stake, they were aggrieved in a different way from other plaintiffs and not representative. We could also say that differences in state law from other plaintiffs could create different incentives so Harry and Ginny not representative. Anchem. However, it is more likely that since Harry, Ginny, and other stakeholders of HG all lost money due to reputation loss, despite different stakes, Harry and Ginny are representative and aggrieved in the same way, with people not likely precluded.

23(b)

Not likely limited fund restriction since more for bankruptcy cases where only certain amount of money that D can pay so runs out. Not a structural 23(b)(2) case seeking injunctive relief. Likely falls under damages class actions.

Damages

Superiority

If million$ considered large individual claim, class action not needed. If considered small, likely needed and superior. Class member interests are similar so likely superior. However, HCOl differences in state law might make better for individual suits.

Predominance

If already proved commonality, probably proved predominance.

6.

Expanding claim preclusion to any claims that could have been brought in the first case would create many sweeping changes. In favor of expanding CP, judicial resources would be conserved even further. If you can’t try another case for similar reasons, then P is incentivized to bring in all evidence at once and finality will make it so the court will not waste money on cases with a similar result or using the same evidence. Lawyers will have fewer lawsuits so either get paid more per lawsuit or become less relevant in general. We can prevent the P from pestering the D with numerous, often frivolous lawsuits. If P will forum shop, we can ensure that they choose the forum of their liking.

However, expanding CP to any claims that could have been brought up in the first case also creates many issues. Those who cannot afford a lawyer or an adequate lawyer will face severe access to justice problems. In criminal cases, those who are falsely convicted will not be able to bring in new discovered evidence and will therefore remain wrongfully convicted. With public defenders being stacked against the D.A., police evidence, and public sentiment to crack down on crime, defendants are likely to lose. Since defendants will be more likely to rely on public defenders, and public defenders are overworked already, the issue of false convictions will severely worsen. One possible alternative is that cities will hire more public defenders to stop the increased urgency of false convictions, but this is unlikely.

In civil cases, those who cannot afford an adequate lawyer will probably be more likely to lose a case since those with money can hire expensive firm lawyers to gather all of this evidence through discovery and the lawyers that defendants have will not be able to compete and be more likely to lose the case. In our unequal capitalist society, those with less money will face further hardships, deepening inequality. However, one could argue that for civil cases, the urgency of finality in expanding CP would help non-lawyers become more active in representing people, civil right to counsel could become a possibility, or know your rights programs would become more common for pro se litigants to defend themselves more accurately, especially considering the high rate of pro se litigants in general in civil suits. Still, it isn’t likely that these positive outcomes would come from expanding CP. It is more likely that the negatives would expand. For example, cities might try and blanket target people for tickets or other simple quality of life offenses to continue making money off of them. Since many low-SES and POC will not be able to win their cases, the cities will reap huge financial profits with little incentive to do otherwise. Therefore, marginalized communities would likely become more over-policed and marginalized in general.
