## Question 1

SMJ:

       No AUJ: No Federal COA. No imbedded Federal issue, so no smith-grable

exception.

       No DJ: Insufficient AIC, so no DJ. Citizenship: HG=MA(PPoB & Place of
Incorporation). DD is a citizen of NH. However, AIC is only $50k.

       SJ: Maybe there's SJ because this claim ("Claim 2," against DD) is from the same
case/controversy as Claim 1 (against TMR). Since SJ has to be anchored by Claim 1, we
first analyze SMJ over the Claim 1.

SMJ over Claim 1:

       No AUJ: No Federal COA. No imbedded Federal issue, so no smith-grable
exception.

       DJ: Probably yes. $950k AIC is sufficient, and parties are probably diverse.
Citizenship: HG=MA(PPoB & Place of Incorporation). TMR is probably domiciled in
RI. Although TMR bought an apartment in MA and pays MA tax, he still returns to his
RI home every weekend (and he votes in RI). Buying an apartment and paying taxes in
MA is probably insufficient to change where he's domiciled since he returns to his RI

residence every weekend (Mas v. Perry).

IPJ: We should look at IPJ over TMR too because the Court might decline to exercise SJ
over Claim 2 if Claim 1 (the anchoring claim) got dismissed (1367(c)(4)).

General IPJ: No general IPJ over either TMR or DD. GenIPJ over TMR only if he's an
MA citizen (probably not, discussion in DJ). TMR has systemic and continuous presence
in MA (Shoe, Perkins), but General IPJ based on continuous presence probably does not
apply to individuals. No GenIPJ over DD. He's a NH citizen.

Specific IPJ: There might be specific IPJ over both TMR and DD(Calder v. Jones, but
see Griffis v. Luban). HG can argue that TMR and DD intentionally aimed their tortious
conduct to MA residents, so there should be specific IPJ (Calder). MA was the focal
point of HG's injury. HG's main audience is probably MA residence since all of the
photographs and videos Harry makes feature MA landmarks. However, TMR and DD
can argue that mere knowledge that HG and its audience resides in MA is not sufficient to

establish that the defamation was directed at MA residents (Griffis).

Venue: Probably proper under 1391(b)(2). Venue would be proper under b1 if TMR is an
MA residence (but probably not). Not proper under b3 (venue would be proper in RI/NH
court). The loss of value of HG occurs in MA, and this is "a substantial part of the events
giving rise to the claim" (last event necessary). So, proper under 1391(b)(2).

Failure to State a Claim: Under Twiqbal plausibility pleading, we must establish

plausibility with sufficient factual support, striking out conclusory statements. The
complaint states a claim with sufficient specificty. We ignore ¶14 and the last two
sentences of ¶20 for being conclusory. Analyze each element of Business Disparagement:
(i) Evidence of participation via anonymous email
(ii) Allegedly false video beacuse Harry never set foot at Drooble's estate (¶13)

(iii) Evidence of reputation harm via youtube video
(iv) Evidence of loss of value via drop in ads revenue
Complaint is nudged accross the line from possible to plausible.

4(a)(1): MARCP requires an additional paper with the address of the courthouse and a
description of the nearest public tranportation. FRCP does not require this. There's a
VCOL issue here. Hooray, Erie!

Under York, the difference would be outcome determinative for the whole suit. Apply
state law.

Under Harlan in Hanna, the difference probably will not affect anyone's pre-litigation
connduct. Apply FRCP.

Under Hanna majority/Scalia, Rule 4(a)(1) directly speaks to the question at issue
(applicable) and probably really regulate procedure (Sibbach). Therefore, it is valid under
the REA. Apply FRCP.

Under Walker/Ginsburg analysis, we can narrowly construe FRCP 4(1)(a) as merely

setting a minimum requirement, but open to any additional requirements. MARCP
4(a)(1)(H) merely sets additional requirements not inconsistent with the FRCP.
Therefore, state law controls.

The Erie tests give mixed results. Dismiss if MARCP applies, otherwise probably not.

HCOL issue? Probably not because MARCP rule is clearly procedural for HCOL
purpose, so no need to do HCOL analysis here. Apply procedural law of the forum state
(MA).

-------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------

## Question 2

TMR and DD probably met at their office. The email and mp4 are strong evidence
establishing the meeting between TMR and DD. Neither TMR or DD affirmatively
denied that they had a meeting (but they said they have no memory of it). However, HG
has no evidence regarding the modification of video.

(a)

HCOL issue is important here. If MA Public Access Defense ("PAD")applies, then DD's
summary judgment may be granted. Otherwise, no. Whether PAD applies is a substantive
law issue (not procedural), so apply NH HCOL rule (1st restatement). We apply the law
of the state where the last act necessary to complete the tort occured (lex loci deliciti).

The loss of value of HG occurs in MA, and this is last event necessary to complete the
tort of "Business Dispagaragement." So, MA substantive law applies and PAD can be
asserted.

Apply Celotex (Brennnan), first, to DD's motion. DD has the burden of persuasion at
trial because PAD is an affirmative defense. DD has to show that HG has "constant and
ready access to the public or media outlets." Can DD produce evidence that, if
unrebutted, would compel any reasonable jury finding in his favor? Probably yes. ¶6, 7,

which Harry himself testified for, are probably strong evidence that DD can assert PAD.
It's clear that HG has access to various media outlets (¶6). In addition, the fact that HG
can generate revenues from Ads is a strong evidence that HG as a significant number of
audience (¶7).

Now, burden of production shifts to HG. HG would have a hard time trying to show they
do not have constant and ready access to the public. Therefore, Summary Judgement for
DD based on PAD will probably be granted.

(b)

Apply Celotex (Brennnan) to HG's motion. HG has the burden of persuasion at trial to
show that DD and TMR are liable for Business Disparagement. Can HG produce
evidence that, if unrebutted, would compel any reasonable jury finding in his favor?
Probably no. HG can probably establish that a meeting occured between DD and TMR. In
addition, they may claim the YouTube video and TMR's "your company will be worth

less" statement evince that DD and TMR modified and distributed the false video.
However, that's not a very strong argument. A jury may reasonably believe that another
person obtained the mp4 without DD's or TMR's knowledge, modified it, and distributed
it (DD and TMR might have nothing to do with this). Therefore, HG's motion for
summary juddment will not succeed.

-------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------

## Question 3

Not appealable. Damage has not been awarded. Not a final judgment, so not appealable
(Liberty Mutual). No injunction. No issue collateral to the merits. No trial Judge
recitation for double discretion 1292(b). No certification for Rule 54(b). No special harm
for mandamus.

-------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------

## Question 4

Claim Preclusion: Harry and Ginny are claim precluded.

         Same claim. The complaint by Harry and Ginny ("Ha&Gi") clearly assert the same
claim. That is, Business Disparagement based on Riddle/Harry deepfake video.

         Same party (in privity). Ha&Gi are in privity with HG (Gonzalez). Harry is the
CEO and the Chair of the Board. Ginny is the Vice President of the Board. They probably
exercised substantial control over the initial litigation ("L1") by HG. In addition, Ha&Gi
probably got some money from L1 settlement. So, their interest has been adequately
represented.

         Final Judgment on the Merit. L1 dismissal through settlement is probably
considered on the merit. First, as a policy matter, the interest of Ha&Gi was clearly
represented in L1. Second, the settlement with HG only makes sense if HG's shareholders
would be claim precluded. DD and TMR would be effectively paying double damage for
their tort if HG's shareholders are not claim precluded. Finally, the trial court issued a
judgment "with prejudice," indicating that the same claim should not be brought back to
court.

Issue Preclusion:

       Interstate Preclusion. The New Hampshire State Court should at least apply as
much preclusion as the court that renders the judgment in L1 (Semtek). However, which
one is the "rendering" court? MA or NH Fed Court? If the MA Fed Court was a Happy

Court, then a strong argument can be made that the transfer to NH Fed Court was merely
a change of courtroom. So, MA preclusion law should apply. However, a
counterargument can be made by applealing to simplicity. It'd be simpler if we can
determine the applicable preclusion law just by looking to the court that actually renders
the judgment. In this case, it's the NH Fed Court. So maybe NH preclusion law applies. If
MA Fed Court was the "rendering" court, then NH State Court need to apply no
mutuality for IP. Otherwise, apply NH strict mutuality requirement.

       Same issue. Clearly the same issue (Business Disparagement based on
Riddle/Harry deepfake video).

       Same parties. Not an issue if we're giving as much preclusive effect as MA IP law
(no mutuality). If NH law applies, then L2 does not have the same party as L1 (but can
we argue they're in privity, therefore the same "plaintiff"? maybe not), so no IP.

       Not actually litigated. The issue was not actually litigated in court. The parties
settled.

       May not be necessary to the decision. Unclear what motivates the settlement since

the discussion were not made public.

Therefore, no issue preclusion, but there's claim preclusion.

-------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------

## Question 5

Under Rule 23, we need to consider four things:

- Commonality: Class members suffered the same injury (reduction in share value). The
claim depends on a common contention, that DD committed Business Disparagement,
capable of class wide resolution. Difference of damage awards to different members
should not be an issue here because it can be prorated. There might also be a different
HCOL issue here because plaintiffs are located in different states.

- Typicallity: Harry and Ginny have the same incentive as the other class members (to
get as much damage awards as they can).

- Representativeness: Harry and Ginny are probably representative. Although they own
more shares in the company compared to other members, this is probably insufficient to
cast doubt on their representativeness. Their interest is clearly alligned with other
shareholders here.

- Numerosity: Unclear because the number of class members is between 20 and 40. Is it
practicable for each member to bring their own lawsuit? probably. Each of the 1.5%
shareholders have $15k at stake here, so each of them can probably bring their own suit.

Plaintiffs are quite diverse (from four different states), so court are more likely to
consider the numerosity prong fulfilled.

Rule 23 requirements are probably met. This is a damages class action under 23(b)(3), so
there's two additional prong to fulfill.

- Superiorirty: All plaintiff have at least $15k of claim, so it's unclear whether a class
action is superior. Furthermore, there's might be a HCOL issue here because plaintiffs are
located in different states.

- Predominance: Common issue certainly predominate. See Commonality.

On balance, we can probably defeat class action by contesting
Commonality/Numerosity/Superiority.

-------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------

## Question 6

       The first suggestion exapands issue preclusion by barring the losing party from
litigating an issue they could have raised in Litigation 1. This will surely promote
efficiency. By enforcing this rule, parties will not be able to "test out" their arguments in
multiple law suits. Rather, they will be incentivized to raise all issues and arguments to
win Litigation 1.

       However, the proposed rule face an issue more problematic than gratuitious
decision (Rios). Applying this new rule, it is entirely possible for a non-decision to have a
preclusive effect (even when the issue has never been litigated!). This is especially
problematic when combined with the lack of mutuality requirement (e.g. NY issue
preclusion law). If this new proposal were to be implemented, it has to be safe-guarded

by strict mutuality requirement. Non-mutual party should not be issue precluded just
because a different party in L1 did not raise the issue, especially if the non-mutual party
in L2 could not have joined L1. We need to make sure that a party had their full day in
court before precluding them (Marrese). Mutuality requirement will likely solve this
issue. As a policy matter, it's probably not unfair to issue preclude a party who chose not
to raise the relevant issue in the previous litigation.

       Furthermore, expanding preclusion rule can be burdensome for indigent litigant

since they might not understand complicated legal rules (Lassiter, Vitek). Applying this
rule, pro se litigants might be unjustly precluded in subsequent cases because they did not
bring up the relevant issue when they could have. One way to solve this problem is to
apply the new rule only to parties who are able to afford counsel.

         Another possible way to expand issue preclusion is to dispense with the "necessary
to the decision" requirement. This new rule would dispense with both the necessary and
finality element. For example, if an issue has been decided in Litigation #1, Court #2
adjudicating Litigation #2 need not wait until Litigation #1 goes to judgment to issue
preclude.

         Since litigation often takes a long time, dispensing with the "finality" requirement -
and by implication, the "necessary" requirement - can be beneficial, especially when an
important issue is decided relatively early. Under the current issue preclusion law,
subsequent courts are unable to use that decision to issue preclude because there's no
judgment yet. In contrast, under the new rule, subsequent courts do not have to wait for

L1 judgment to issue preclude. This will promote efficiency since litigation can take a
long time to reach judgment. In the meantime, other courts might be litigating the same
issue.

         However, there are significant drawbacks with this proposal. A decision on an issue
might be gratuitious (Rios), and we do not want gratuitious decision to preclude
subsequent litigants. In response to this criticism, it can be argued that if this proposed
rule is in place, courts - knowing that their decisions can be grounds for preclusion - will

no longer make "gratuitious" decision. Although, it is unclear if this response is
convincing. Furthermore, a decision regarding an issue might change during the course of
the litigation as new evidence comes to light. One possible way to mitigate this criticism
is by requiring that to have a preclusive effect, the decision has to be "reasonably certain"
and "unlikely to change."

       My proposed expansion of issue preclusion may be beneficial for pro se litigants.
Indigent litigants might not have the knowledge or resources to go to trial. By expanding
issue preclusion, pro se litigants can "piggy back" on others who have litigated the same
issue (even when there's no judgment yet). In addition, the proposal can be interpreted as
an attempt to simplify and "level down" our legal process (Turner). Removing the
"necessary to the decision" requirements for issue preclusion will make it easier for pro-
se litigants to use issue preclusion rules to their benefit.
